Come Closer to Feminism
Everywhere I go I proudly tell folks who want to know who I am
and what I do that I am a writer, a feminist theorist, a cultural critic. I
tell them I write about movies and popular culture, analyzing the
message in the medium. Most people find this exciting and want to
know more. Everyone goes to movies, watches television, glances
through magazines, and everyone has thoughts about the messages
they receive, about the images they look at. It is easy for the diverse
public I encounter to understand what I do as a cultural critic, to un-
derstand my passion for writing Oots of folks want to write, and do).
But feminist theory - that's the place where the questions stop. In-
stead I tend to hear all about the evil of feminism and the bad femi-
nists: how "they" hate men; how "they" want to go against nature-
and god; how "they" are all lesbians; how "they" are taking all the jobs
and making the world hard for white men, who do not stand a chance.
When I ask these same folks about the feminist books or maga-
zines they read, when I ask them about the feminist talks they have
heard, about the feminist activists they know, they respond by let-
ting me know that everything they know about feminism has come
into their lives thirdhand, that they really have not come close
enough to feminist movement to know what really happens, what
it's really about. Mostly they think feminism is a bunch of angry

women who want to be like men. They do not even think about
feminism as being about rights - about women gaining equal
rights. When I talk about the feminism I know - up close and per-
sonal- they willingly listen, although when our conversations end,
they are quick to tell me I am different, not like the "real" feminists
who hate men, who are angry. I assure them I am as a real and as rad-
ical a feminist as one can be, and if they dare to come closer to femi-
nism they will see it is not how they have imagined it.
Each time I leave one of these encounters, I want to have in my
hand a little book so that I can say, read this book, and it will tell you
what feminism is, what the movement is about. I want to be holding
in my hand a concise, fairly easy to read and understand book; not a
long book, not a book thick with hard to understand jargon and aca-
demic language, but a straightforward, clear book - easy to read
without being simplistic. From the moment feminist thinking, poli-
tics, and practice changed my life, I have wanted this book. I have
wanted to give it to the folk I love so that they can understand better
this cause, this feminist politics I believe in so deeply, that is the
foundation of my political life.
I have wanted them to have an answer to the question "what is
feminism?" that is rooted neither in fear or fantasy. I have wanted
them to have this simple definition to read again and again so they
know: "Feminism is a movement to end sexism, sexist exploitation,
and oppression." I love this definition, which I first offered more
than 10 years ago in my book Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. I
love it because it so clearly states that the movement is not about be-
ing anti-male. It makes it clear that the problem is sexism. And that
clarity helps us remember that all of us, female and male, have been
socialized from birth on to accept sexist thought and action. As a
consequence, females can be just as sexist as men. And while that
does not excuse or justify male domination, it does mean that it

would be naive and wrongminded for feminist thinkers to see the
movement as simplistically being for women against men. To end
patriarchy (another way of naming the institutionalized sexism) we
need to be clear that we are all participants in perpetuating sexism
until we change our minds and hearts, until we let go of sexist
thought and action and replace it with feminist thought and action.
Males as a group have and do benefit the most from patriarchy,
from the assumption that they are superior to females and should
rule over us. But those benefits have come with a price. In return for
all the goodies men receive from patriarchy, they are required to
dominate women, to exploit and oppress us, using violence if they
must to keep patriarchy intact. Most men find it difficult to be patri-
archs. Most men are disturbed by hatred and fear of women, by male
violence against women, even the men who perpetuate this vio-
lence. But they fear letting go of the benefits. They are not certain
what will happen to the world they know most intimately if patriar-
chy changes. So they find it easier to passively support male domina-
tion even when they know in their minds and hearts that it is wrong.
Again and again men tell me they have no idea what it is feminists
want. I believe them. I believe in their capacity to change and grow.
And I believe that if they knew more about feminism they would no
longer fear it, for they would find in feminist movement the hope of
their own release from the bondage of patriarchy.
It is for these men, young and old, and for all of us, that I have
written this short handbook, the book I have spent more than 20
years longing for. I had to write it because I kept waiting for it to ap-
pear, and it did not. And without it there was no way to address the
hordes of people in this nation who are daily bombarded with
anti-feminist backlash, who are being told to hate and resist a move-
ment that they know very little about. There should be so many little
feminist primers, easy to read pamphlets and books, telling 
about feminism, that this book would be just another passionate
voice speaking out on behalf of feminist politics. There should be bill-
boards; ads in magazines; ads on buses, subways, trains; television
commercials spreading the word, letting the world know more about
feminism. We are not there yet. But this is what we must do to share
feminism, to let the movement into everyone's mind and heart.
Feminist change has already touched all our lives in a positive way.
And yet we lose sight of the positive when all we hear about femi-
nism is negative.
When I began to resist male domination, to rebel against patri-
archal thinking (and to oppose the strongest patriarchal voice in my
life - my mother's voice), I was still a teenager, suicidal, depressed,
uncertain about how I would find meaning in my life and a place for
myself. I needed feminism to give me a foundation of equality and
justice to stand on. Mama has come around to feminist thinking. She
sees me and all her daughters (we are six) living better lives because of
feminist politics. She sees the promise and hope in feminist move-
ment. It is that promise and hope that I want to share with you in
this book, with everybody.
Imagine living in a world where there is no domination, where
females and males are not alike or even always equal, but where a vi-
sion of mutuality is the ethos shaping our interaction. Imagine living
in a world where we can all be who we are, a world of peace and pos-
sibility. Feminist revolution alone will not create such a world; we
need to end racism, class elitism, imperialism. But it will make it possi-
ble for us to be fully self-actualized females and males able to create
beloved community, to live together, realizing our dreams of freedom
and justice, living the truth that we are all "created equal." Come
closer. See how feminism can touch and change your life and all our
lives. Come closer and know firsthand what feminist movement is all
about. Come closer and you will see: feminism is for everybody.

Where We Stand
Simply put, feminism is a movement to end sexism, sexist exploita-
tion, and oppression. This was a definition of feminism I offered in
Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center more than 10 years ago. It was
my hope at the time that it would become a common definition
everyone would use. I liked this definition because it did not imply
that men were the enemy. By naming sexism as the problem it went
directly to the heart of the matter. Practically, it is a definition which
implies that all sexist thinking and action is the problem, whether
those who perpetuate it are female or male, child or adult. It is also
broad enough to include an understanding of systemic institutional-
ized sexism. As a definition it is open-ended. To understand femi-
nism it implies one has to necessarily understand sexism.
As all advocates of feminist politics know, most people do not
understand sexism, or if they do, they think it is not a problem.
Masses of people think that feminism is always and only about
women seeking to be equal to men. And a huge majority of these
folks think feminism is anti-male. Their misunderstanding of femi-
nist politics reflects the reality that most folks learn about feminism
from patriarchal mass media. The feminism they hear about the
most is portrayed by women who are primarily committed to gender
equality - equal pay for equal work, and sometimes women
men sharing household chores and parenting. They see that these
women are usually white and materially privileged. They know from
mass media that women's liberation focuses on the freedom to have
abortions, to be lesbians, to challenge rape and domestic violence.
Among these issues, masses of people agree with the idea of gender
equity in the workplace - equal pay for equal work.
Since our society continues to be primarily a "Christian" cul-
ture, masses of people continue to believe that god has ordained that
women be subordinate to men in the domestic household. Even
though masses of women have entered the workforce, even though
many families are headed by women who are the sole breadwinners,
the vision of domestic life which continues to dominate the nation's
imagination is one in which the logic of male domination is intact,
whether men are present in the home or not. The wrongminded no-
tion of feminist movement which implied it was anti-male carried
with it the wrongminded assumption that all female space would
necessarily be an environment where patriarchy and sexist thinking
would be absent. Many women, even those involved in feminist pol-
itics, chose to believe this as well.
There was indeed a great deal of anti-male sentiment among
early feminist activists who were responding to male domination
with anger. It was that anger at injustice that was the impetus for cre-
ating a women's liberation movement. Early on most feminist activ-
ists (a majority of whom were white) had their consciousness raised
about the nature of male domination when they were working in
anti-classist and anti-racist settings with men who were telling the
world about the importance of freedom while subordinating the
women in their ranks. Whether it was white women working on be-
half of socialism, black women working on behalf of civil rights and
black liberation, or Native American women working for indige-
nous rights, it was clear that men wanted to lead, and they wante
3
women to follow. Participating in these radical freedom struggles
awakened the spirit of rebellion and resistance in progressive fe-
males and led them towards contemporary women's liberation.
As contemporary feminism progressed, as women realized that
males were not the only group in our society who supported sexist
thinking and behavior -
that females could be sexist as well -
anti-male sentiment no longer shaped the movement's conscious-
ness. The focus shifted to an all-out effort to create gender justice.
But women could not band together to further feminism without
confronting our sexist thinking. Sisterhood could not be powerful
as long as women were competitively at war with one another. Uto-
pian visions of sisterhood based solely on the awareness of the real-
ity that all women were in some way victimized by male domination
were disrupted by discussions of class and race. Discussions of class
differences occurred early on in contemporary feminism, preceding
discussions of race. Diana Press published revolutionary insights
about class divisions between women as early as the mid-'70s in their
collection of essays Class and Feminism. These discussions did not
trivialize the feminist insistence that "sisterhood is powerful," they
simply emphasized that we could only become sisters in struggle by
confronting the ways women -
through sex, class, and race -
dominated and exploited other women, and created a political plat-
form that would address these differences.
Even though individual black women were active in contempo-
rary feminist movement from its inception, they were not the indi-
viduals who became the "stars" of the movement, who attracted the
attention of mass media. Often individual black women active in
feminist movement were revolutionary feminists (like many white
lesbians). They were already at odds with reformist feminists who
resolutely wanted to project a vision of the movement as being
solely about women gaining equality with men in the existin
tem. Even before race became a talked about issue in feminist circles
it was clear to black women (and to their revolutionary allies in
struggle) that they were never going to have equality within the exist-
ing white supremacist capitalist patriarchy.
From its earliest inception feminist movement was polarized.
Reformist thinkers chose to emphasize gender equality. Revolution-
ary thinkers did not want simply to alter the existing system so that
women would have more rights. We wanted to transform that sys-
tem, to bring an end to patriarchy and sexism. Since patriarchal mass
media was not interested in the more revolutionary vision, it never
received attention in mainstream press. The vision of "women's lib-
eration" which captured and still holds the public imagination was
the one representing women as wanting what men had. And this was
the vision that was easier to realize. Changes in our nation's econ-
omy, economic depression, the loss of jobs, etc., made the climate
ripe for our nation's citizens to accept the notion of gender equality
in the workforce.
Given the reality of racism, it made sense that white men were
more willing to consider women's rights when the granting of those
rights could serve the interests of maintaining white supremacy. We
can never forget that white women began to assert their need for
freedom after civil rights, just at the point when racial discrimination
was ending and black people, especially black males, might have at-
tained equality in the workforce with white men. Reformist feminist
thinking focusing primarily on equality with men in the workforce
overshadowed the original radical foundations of contemporary
feminism which called for reform as well as overall restructuring of
society so that our nation would be fundamentally anti-sexist.
Most women, especially privileged white women, ceased even
to consider revolutionary feminist visions, once they began to gain
economic power within the existing social structure. Ironically, revolutionary feminist thinking was most accepted and embraced in
academic circles. In those circles the production of revolutionary
feminist theory progressed, but more often than not that theory was
not made available to the public. It became and remains a privileged
discourse available to those among us who are highly literate, well-
educated, and usually materially privileged. Works like Feminist The-
ory: From Margin to Center that offer a liberatory vision of feminist
transformation never receive mainstream attention. Masses of peo-
ple have not heard of this book. They have not rejected its message;
they do not know what the message is.
While it was in the interest of mainstream white supremacist
capitalist patriarchy to suppress visionary feminist thinking which
was not anti-male or concerned with getting women the right to be
like men, reformist feminists were also eager to silence these forces.
Reformist feminism became their route to class mobility. They
could break free of male domination in the workforce and be more
self-determining in their lifestyles. While sexism did not end, they
could maximize their freedom within the existing system. And they
could count on there being a lower class of exploited subordinated
women to do the dirty work they were refusing to do. By accepting
and indeed colluding with the subordination of working-class and
poor women, they not only ally themselves with the existing patriar-
chy and its concomitant sexism, they give themselves the right to lead
a double life, one where they are the equals of men in the workforce
and at home when they want to be. If they choose lesbianism they
have the privilege of being equals with men in the workforce while
using class power to create domestic lifestyles where they can
choose to have little or no contact with men.
Lifestyle feminism ushered in the notion that there could be as
many versions of feminism as there were women. Suddenly the politics
was being slowly removed from feminism. And the assumptio
vailed that no matter what a woman's politics, be she conservative
or liberal, she too could fit feminism into her existing lifestyle. Obvi-
ously this way of thinking has made feminism more acceptable be-
cause its underlying assumption is that women can be feminists
without fundamentally challenging and changing themselves or the
culture. For example, let's take the issue of abortion. If feminism is a
movement to end sexist oppression, and depriving females of repro-
ductive rights is a form of sexist oppression, then one cannot be
anti-choice and be feminist. A woman can insist she would never
choose to have an abortion while affirming her support of the right
of women to choose and still be an advocate of feminist politics. She
cannot be anti-abortion and an advocate of feminism. Concurrently
there can be no such thing as "power feminism" if the vision of
power evoked is power gained through the exploitation and oppres-
sion of others.
Feminist politics is losing momentum because feminist move-
ment has lost clear definitions. We have those definitions. Let's re-
claim them. Let's share them. Let's start over. Let's have T-shirts and
bumper stickers and postcards and hip-hop music, television and ra-
dio commercials, ads everywhere and billboards, and all manner of
printed material that tells the world about feminism. We can share the
simple yet powerful message that feminism is a movement to end sex-
ist oppression. Let's start there. Let the movement begin again.
2
A Constant Change of Heart
Feminists are made, not born. One does not become an advocate of
feminist politics simply by having the privilege of having been born
female. Like all political positions one becomes a believer in feminist
politics through choice and action. When women first organized in
groups to talk together about the issue of sexism and male domina-
tion, they were clear that females were as socialized to believe sexist
thinking and values as males, the difference being simply that males
benefited from sexism more than females and were as a conse-
quence less likely to want to surrender patriarchal privilege. Before
women could change patriarchy we had to change ourselves; we had
to raise our consciousness.
Revolutionary feminist consciousness-raising emphasized the
importance of learning about patriarchy as a system of domination,
how it became institutionalized and how it is perpetuated and main-
tained. Understanding the way male domination and sexism was ex-
pressed in everyday life created awareness in women of the ways we
were victimized, exploited, and, in worse case scenarios, oppressed.
Early on in contemporary feminist movement, consciousness-raising
groups often became settings where women simply unleashed pent-
up hostility and rage about being victimized, with little or no focus
on strategies of intervention and transformation. On a basic l
many hurt and exploited women used the consciousness-raising
group therapeutically. It was the site where they uncovered and
openly revealed the depths of their intimate wounds. This confes-
sional aspect served as a healing ritual. Through consciousness-
raising women gained the strength to challenge patriarchal forces at
work and at home.
Importantly though, the foundation of this work began with
women examining sexist thinking and creating strategies where we
would change our attitudes and belief via a conversion to feminist
thinking and a commitment to feminist politics. Fundamentally, the
consciousness-raising (CR) group was a site for conversion. To
build a mass-based feminist movement women needed to organize.
The consciousness-raising session, which usually took place in
someone's home (rather than public space that had to be rented or
donated), was the meeting place. It was the place where seasoned
feminist thinkers and activists could recruit new converts.
Importantly, communication and dialogue was a central agenda
at the consciousness-raising sessions. In many groups a policy was
in place which honored everyone's voice. Women took turns speak-
ing to make sure everyone would be heard. This attempt to create a
non-hierarchal model for discussion positively gave every woman a
chance to speak but often did not create a context for engaged dia-
logue. However, in most instances discussion and debate occurred,
usually after everyone had spoken at least once. Argumentative dis-
cussion was common in CR groups as it was the way we sought to
clarify our collective understanding of the nature of male domina-
tion. Only through discussion and disagreement could we begin to
find a realistic standpoint on gender exploitation and oppression.
As feminist thinking, which emerged first in the context of
small groups where individuals often knew each other (they may
have worked together and/ or were friends), began to be theorized
in printed matter so as to reach a wider audience, groups dismantled.
The creation of women's studies as an academic discipline provided
another setting where women could be informed about feminist
thinking and feminist theory. Many of the women who spearheaded
the introduction of women's studies classes into colleges and uni-
versities had been radical activists in civil rights struggles, gay rights,
and early feminist movement. Many of them did not have doctor-
ates, which meant that they entered academic institutions receiving
lower pay and working longer hours than their colleagues in other
disciplines. By the time younger graduate students joined the effort
to legitimize feminist scholarship in the academy we knew that it
was important to gain higher degrees. Most of us saw our commit-
ment to women's studies as political action; we were prepared to
sacrifice in order to create an academic base for feminist movement.
By the late '70s women's studies was on its way to becoming
an accepted academic discipline. This triumph overshadowed the
fact that many of the women who had paved the way for the
institutionalization of women's studies were fired because they had
master's degrees and not doctorates. While some of us returned to
graduate school to get PhDs, some of the best and brightest among
us did not because they were utterly disillusioned with the university
and burnt out from overwork as well as disappointed and enraged
that the radical politics undergirding women's studies was being re-
placed by liberal reformism. Before too long the women's studies
classroom had replaced the free-for-all consciousness-raising group.
Whereas women from various backgrounds, those who worked
solely as housewives or in service jobs, and big-time professional
women, could be found in diverse consciousness-raising groups, the
academy was and remains a site of class privilege. Privileged white
middle-class women who were a numeric majority though not nec-
essarily the radical leaders of contemporary feminist movemen
ten gained prominence because they were the group mass media
focused on as representatives of the struggle. Women with revolu-
tionary feminist consciousness, many of them lesbian and from
working-class backgrounds, often lost visibility as the movement re-
ceived mainstream attention. Their displacement became complete
once women's studies became entrenched in colleges and universi-
ties which are conservative corporate structures. Once the women's
studies classroom replaced the consciousness-raising group as the
primary site for the transmission of feminist thinking and strategies
for social change the movement lost its mass-based potential.
Suddenly more and more women began to either call them-
selves "feminists" or use the rhetoric of gender discrimination to
change their economic status. The institutionalization of feminist
studies created a body of jobs both in the world of the academy and
in the world of publishing. These career-based changes led to forms
of career opportunism wherein women who had never been politi-
cally committed to mass-based feminist struggle adopted the stance
and jargon of feminism when it enhanced their class mobility. The
dismantling of consciousness-raising groups all but erased the notion
that one had to learn about feminism and make an informed choice
about embracing feminist politics to become a feminist advocate.
Without the consciousness-raising group as a site where women
confronted their own sexism towards other women, the direction of
feminist movement could shift to a focus on equality in the work-
force and confronting male domination. With heightened focus on
the construction of woman as a "victim" of gender equality deserv-
ing of reparations (whether through changes in discriminatory laws
or affirmative action policies) the idea that women needed to first
confront their internalized sexism as part of becoming feminist lost
currency. Females of all ages acted as though concern for or rage at
male domination or gender equality was all that was needed to make
11
one a "feminist." Without confronting internalized sexism women
who picked up the feminist banner often betrayed the cause in their
interactions with other women.
By the early '80s the evocation of a politicized sisterhood, so
crucial at the onset of the feminist movement, lost meaning as the
terrain of radical feminist politics was overshadowed by a lifestyle-
based feminism which suggested any woman could be a feminist no
matter what her political beliefs. Needless to say such thinking has
undermined feminist theory and practice, feminist politics. When
feminist movement renews itself, reinforcing again and again the
strategies that will enable a mass movement to end sexism and sexist
exploitation and oppression for everyone, consciousness-raising
will once again attain its original importance. Effectively imitating
the model of AA meetings, feminist consciousness-raising groups
will take place in communities, offering the message of feminist
thinking to everyone irrespective of class, race, or gender. While
specific groups based on shared identities might emerge, at the end
of every month individuals would be in mixed groups.
Feminist consciousness-raising for males is as essential to revo-
lutionary movement as female groups. Had there been an emphasis
on groups for males that taught boys and men about what sexism is
and how it can be transformed, it would have been impossible for
mass media to portray the movement as anti-male. It would also
have preempted the formation of an anti-feminist men's movement.
Often men's groups were formed in the wake of contemporary fem-
inism that in no way addressed the issues of sexism and male domi-
nation. Like the lifestyle-based feminism aimed at women these
groups often became therapeutic settings for men to confront their
wounds without a critique of patriarchy or a platform of resistance
to male domination. Future feminist movement will not make this
mistake. Males of all ages need settings where their resistance to
ism is affirmed and valued. Without males as allies in struggle femi-
nist movement will not progress. As it is we have to do so much
work to correct the assumption deeply embedded in the cultural
psyche that feminism is anti-male. Feminism is anti-sexism. A male
who has divested of male privilege, who has embraced feminist
politics, is a worthy comrade in struggle, in no way a threat to femi-
nism, whereas a female who remains wedded to sexist thinking and
behavior infiltrating feminist movement is a dangerous threat. Sig-
nificantly, the most powerful intervention made by consciousness-
raising groups was the demand that all females confront their inter-
nalized sexism, their allegiance to patriarchal thinking and action,
and their commitment to feminist conversion. That intervention is
still needed. It remains the necessary step for anyone choosing femi-
nist politics. The enemy within must be transformed before we can
confront theenemy outside. The threat, the enemy, is sexist thought
and behavior. As long as females take up the banner of feminist poli-
tics without addressing and transforming their own sexism, ulti-
mately the movement will be undermined.

When the slogan "Sisterhood is powerful" was first used, it was awe-
some. I began my full-fledged participation in feminist movement
my sophomore year in college. Attending an all women's college for
a year before I transferred to Stanford University, I knew from first-
hand experience the difference in female self-esteem and self-assertion
in same-sex classrooms versus those where males were present. At
Stanford males ruled the day in every classroom. Females spoke less,
took less initiative, and often when they spoke you could hardly hear
what they were saying. Their voices lacked strength and confidence.
And to make matters worse we were told time and time again by
male professors that we were not as intelligent as the males, that we
could not be "great" thinkers, writers, and so on. These attitudes
shocked me since I had come from an all-female environment
where our intellectual worth and value was constantly affirmed by
the standard of academic excellence our mostly female professors
set for us and themselves.
Indeed, I was indebted to my favorite white female English pro-
fessor who thought I was not getting the academic guidance I
needed at our women's college because they did not have an intensi-
fied writing program. She encouraged me to attend Stanford. She
believed that I would someday be an important thinker and writer.

At Stanford my ability was constantly questioned. I began to doubt
myself. Then feminist movement rocked the campus. Female stu-
dents and professors demanded an end to discrimination based on
gender inside and outside the classroom. Wow, it was an intense and
awesome time. There I took my first women's studies class with the
writer Tillie Olsen, who compelled her students to think first and
foremost about the fate of women from working-class backgrounds.
There the scholar and one-day biographer of Anne Sexton, Diane
Middlebrook, passed out one of my poems in our class on contem-
porary poetry with no name on it and asked us to identify whether
the writer was male or female, an experiment that made us think crit-
ically about judging the value of writing on the basis of gender bi-
ases. There I began to write my first book at the age of 19, Ain't I a
Woman: Black Women and Feminism. None of these incredible trans-
formations would have happened without feminist movement cre-
ating a foundation for solidarity between women.
That foundation rested on our critique of what we then called
"the enemy within," referring to our internalized sexism. We all
knew firsthand that we had been socialized as females by patriarchal
thinking to see ourselves as inferior to men, to see ourselves as al-
ways and only in competition with one another for patriarchal ap-
proval, to look upon each other with jealousy, fear, and hatred.
Sexist thinking made us judge each other without compassion and
punish one another harshly. Feminist thinking helped us unlearn fe-
male self-hatred. It enabled us to break free of the hold patriarchal
thinking had on our consciousness.
Male bonding was an accepted and affirmed aspect of patriar-
chal culture. It was simply assumed that men in groups would stick
together, support one another, be team players, place the good of
the group over individual gain and recognition. Female bonding was
not possible within patriarchy; it was an act of treason. Feminist

15
movement created the context for female bonding. We did not
bond against men, we bonded to protect our interests as women.
When we challenged professors who taught no books by women, it
was not because we did not like those professors (we often did);
rightly, we wanted an end to gender biases in the classroom and in
the curriculum.
The feminist transformations that were taking place in our coed
college in the early '70s were taking place as well in the world of
home and work. First and foremost feminist movement urged fe-
males to no longer see ourselves and our bodies as the property of
men. To demand control of our sexuality, effective birth control and
reproductive rights, an end to rape and sexual harassment, we needed
to stand in solidarity. In order for women to change job discrimina-
tion we needed to lobby as a group to change public policy. Chal-
lenging and changing female sexist thinking was the first step
towards creating the powerful sisterhood that would ultimately rock
our nation.
Following in the wake of civil rights revolution feminist move-
ment in the '70s and '80s changed the face of our nation. The femi-
nist activists who made these changes possible cared for the
well-being of all females. We understood that political solidarity be-
tween females expressed in sisterhood goes beyond positive recog-
nition of the experiences of women and even shared sympathy for
common suffering. Feminist sisterhood is rooted in shared commit-
ment to struggle against patriarchal injustice, no matter the form
that injustice takes. Political solidarity between women always un-
dermines sexism and sets the stage for the overthrow of patriarchy.
Significantly, sisterhood could never have been possible across the
boundaries of race and class if individual women had not been willing
to divest of their power to dominate and exploit subordinated grou
of women. As long as women are using class or race power to domi-
nate other women, feminist sisterhood cannot be fully realized.
As more women begin to opportunistically lay claim to femi-
nism in the '80s without undergoing the feminist consciousness-
raising that would have enabled them to divest of their sexism, the
patriarchal assumption that the powerful should rule over the weak
informed their relations to other women. As women, particularly
previously disenfranchised privileged white women, began to ac-
quire class power without divesting of their internalized sexism, divi-
sions between women intensified. When women of color critiqued
the racism within the society as a whole and called attention to the
ways that racism had shaped and informed feminist theory and prac-
tice, many white women simply turned their backs on the vision of
sisterhood, closing their minds and their hearts. And that was
equally true when it came to the issue of classism among women.
I remember when feminist women, mostly white women with
class privilege, debated the issue of whether or not to hire domestic
help, trying to come up with a way to not participate in the subordi-
nation and dehumanization of less-privileged women. Some of
those women successfully created positive bonding between them-
selves and the women they hired so that there could be mutual ad-
vancement in a larger context of inequality. Rather than abandoning
the vision of sisterhood, because they could not attain some utopian
state, they created a real sisterhood, one that took into account the
needs of everyone involved. This was the hard work of feminist
solidarity between women. Sadly, as opportunism within feminism
intensified, as feminist gains became commonplace and were there-
fore taken for granted, many women did not want to work hard to
create and sustain solidarity.
A large body of women simply abandoned the notion of sister-
hood. Individual women who had once critiqued and challenged pa-

17
triarchy re-aligned themselves with sexist men. Radical women who
felt betrayed by the fierce negative competition between women
often simply retreated. And at this point feminist movement,
which was aimed at positively transforming the lives of all females,
became more stratified. The vision of sisterhood that had been the
rallying cry of the movement seemed to many women to no longer
matter. Political solidarity between women which had been the force
putting in place positive change has been and is now consistently un-
dermined and threatened. As a consequence we are as in need of a
renewed commitment to political solidarity between women as we
were when contemporary feminist movement first began.
When contemporary feminist movement first began we had a
vision of sisterhood with no concrete understanding of the actual
work we would need to do to make political solidarity a reality.
Through experience and hard work, and, yes, by learning from our
failures and mistakes, we now have in place a body of theory and
shared practice that can teach new converts to feminist politics what
must be done to create, sustain, and protect our solidarity. Since
masses of young females know little about feminism and many
falsely assume that sexism is no longer the problem, feminist educa-
tion for critical consciousness must be continuous. Older feminist
thinkers cannot assume that young females will just acquire knowl-
edge of feminism along the way to adulthood. They require guid-
ance. Overall women in our society are forgetting the value and
power of sisterhood. Renewed feminist movement must once again
raise the banner high to proclaim anew "Sisterhood is powerful."
Radical groups of women continue our commitment to build-
ing sisterhood, to making feminist political solidarity between
women an ongoing reality. We continue the work of bonding across
race and class. We continue to put in place the anti-sexist thinking
and practice which affirms the reality that females can achie
self-actualization and success without dominating one another. And
we have the good fortune to know everyday of our lives that sister-
hood is concretely possible, that sisterhood is still powerful.

Before women's studies classes, before feminist literature, individ-
ual women learned about feminism in groups. The women in those
groups were the first to begin to create feminist theory which in-
cluded both an analysis of sexism, strategies for challenging patriar-
chy, and new models of social interaction. Everything we do in life is
rooted in theory. Whether we consciously explore the reasons we
have a particular perspective or take a particular action there is also
an underlying system shaping thought and practice. In its earliest in-
ception feminist theory had as its primary goal explaining to women
and men how sexist thinking worked and how we could challenge
and change it.
In those days most of us had been socialized by parents and so-
ciety to accept sexist thinking. We had not taken time to figure out
the roots of our perceptions. Feminist thinking and feminist theory
urged us to do that. At first feminist theory was made available by
word of mouth or in cheaply put together newsletters and pam-
phlets. The development of women's publishing (where women
wrote, printed, and controlled production on all levels, including
marketing) became the site for the dissemination of feminist think-

ing. While my first book, Ain't I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism,
written in the '70s and published in 1981, was produced by a small
socialist collective, South End Press, at least half of its members
were feminist women, and all its members were anti-sexist.
Producing a body of feminist literature coupled with the de-
mand for the recovery of women's history was one of the most pow-
erful and successful interventions of contemporary feminism. In all
spheres of literary writing and academic scholarship works by
women had historically received little or no attention as a conse-
quence of gender discrimination. Remarkably, when feminist move-
ment exposed biases in curriculum, much of this forgotten and
ignored work was rediscovered. The formation of women's studies
programs in colleges and universities provided institutionallegitima-
tion for academic focus on work by women. Following in the wake
of black studies, women's studies became the place where one could
learn about gender, about women, from a non-biased perspective.
Contrary to popular stereotypes, professors in women's studies
classes did not and do not trash work by men; we intervene on sexist
thinking by showing that women's work is often just as good, as in-
teresting, if not more so, as work by men. So-called great literature
by men is critiqued only to show the biases present in the assess-
ment of aesthetic value. I have never taken a women's studies course
or heard about one where works by men were deemed unimportant
or irrelevant. Feminist critiques of all-male canons of scholarship or
literary work expose biases based on gender. Importantly, these ex-
posures were central to makinOg a place for the recovery of women's
work and a contemporary place for the production of new work by
and about women.
Feminist movement gained momentum when it found its way
into the academy. In classrooms all over the nation young minds
I
were able to learn about feminist thinking, read the theory, and use it
in their academic explorations. When I was a graduate student pre-
paring to write a dissertation, feminist thinking allowed me to
choose to write about a black woman writer who was not widely
read at the time, Toni Morrison. Very little serious literary scholar-
ship had been done on works by black women writers prior to femi-
nist movement. When Alice Walker acquired fame, she participated
in the recovery of the work of writer Zora Neale Hurston, who
shortly became the most canonized black woman writer in Ameri-
can literature. Feminist movement created a revolution when it de-
manded respect for women's academic work, recognition of that
work past and present, and an end to gender biases in curriculum
and pedagogy.
The institutionalization of women's studies helped spread the
word about feminism. It offered a legitimate site for conversion by
providing a sustained body of open minds. Students who attended
women's studies classes were there to learn. They wanted to know
more about feminist thinking. And it was in those classes that many
of us awakened politically. I had come to feminist thinking by chal-
lenging male domination in our patriarchal household. But simply
being the victim of an exploitative or oppressive system and even re-
sisting it does not mean we understand why it's in place or how to
change it. My conversion to feminist politics had occurred long be-
fore I entered college, but the feminist classroom was the place
where I learned feminist thinking and feminist theory. And it was in
that space that I received the encouragement to think critically and
write about black female experience.
Throughout the '70s the production of feminist thinking and
theory was collaborative work in that women were constantly in dia-
logue about ideas, testing and reshaping our paradigms. Indeed,
when black women and other women of color raised the issue of ra-
cial biases as a factor shaping feminist thought there was an initial r
sistance to the notion that much of what privileged class women had
identified as true to female experience might be flawed, but over
time feminist theory changed. Even though many white women
thinkers were able to acknowledge their biases without doing the
work of rethinking, this was still an important shift. By the late '80s
most feminist scholarship reflected an awareness of race and class
differences. Women scholars who were truly committed to feminist
movement and feminist solidarity were eager to produce theory that
would address the realities of most women.
While academic legitimation was crucial to the advancement of
feminist thought, it created a new set of difficulties. Suddenly the
feminist thinking that had emerged direcdy from theory and practice
received less attention than theory that was metalinguistic, creating
exclusive jargon; it was written solely for an academic audience. It
was as if a large body of feminist thinkers banded together to form
an elite group writing theory that could be understood only by an
"in" crowd.
Women and men outside the academic domain were no longer
considered an important audience. Feminist thinking and theory
were no longer tied to feminist movement. Academic politics and
careerism overshadowed feminist politics. Feminist theory began to
be housed in an academic ghetto with litde connection to a world
outside. Work was and is produced in the academy that is oftentimes
visionary, but these insights rarely reach many people. As a conse-
quence the academization of feminist thought in this manner under-
mines feminist movement via depoliticization. Deradicalized, it is
like every other academic discipline with the only difference being
the focus on gender.
Literature that helps inform masses of people, that helps indi-
viduals understand feminist thinking and feminist politics, needs to
be written in a range of styles and formats. We need work that is es-
pecially geared towards youth culture. No one produces this work in
academic settings. Without abandoning women's studies programs
which are already at risk at colleges and universities as conservatives
seek to undo the changes created by struggles for gender justice,
we need feminist studies that is community-based. Imagine a mass-
based feminist movement where folks go door to door passing out
literature, taking the time (as do religious groups) to explain to peo-
ple what feminism is all about.
When contemporary feminist movement was at its peak, sexist
biases in books for children were critiqued. Books "for free chil-
dren" were written. Once we ceased being critically vigilant, the sex-
ism began to reappear. Children's literature is one of the most
crucial sites for feminist education for critical consciousness pre-
cisely because beliefs and identities are still being formed. And more
often than not narrow-minded thinking about gender continues to
be the norm on the playground. Public education for children has to
be a place where feminist activists continue to do the work of creat-
ing an unbiased curriculum.
Future feminist movement must necessarily think of feminist ed-
ucation as significant in the lives of everyone. Despite the economic
gains of individual feminist women, many women who have amassed
wealth or accepted the contribution of wealthy males, who are our al-
lies in struggle, we have created no schools founded on feminist
principles for girls and boys, for women and men. By failing to cre-
ate a mass-based educational movement to teach everyone about
feminism we allow mainstream patriarchal mass media to remain the
primary place where folks learn about feminism, and most of what
they learn is negative. Teaching feminist thought and theory to ev-
eryone means that we have to reach beyond the academic and even
the written word. Masses of folks lack the skills to read most femi-
nist books. Books on tape, songs, radio, and television are all ways 
share feminist knowledge. And of course we need a feminist televi-
sion network, which is not the same as a network for women. Galva-
nizing funds to create a feminist television network would help us
spread feminist thinking globally. If we cannot own a network, let's
pay for time on an existing network. After years of ownership by
males who were not all anti-sexist Ms. magazine is now owned by
women who are all deeply committed to feminist principles. This is a
step in the right direction.
If we do not work to create a mass-based movement which offers
feminist education to everyone, females and males, feminist theory
and practice will always be undermined by the negative information
produced in most mainstream media. The citizens of this nation
cannot know the positive contributions feminist movement has
made to all our lives if we do not highlight these gains. Constructive
feminist contributions to the well-being of our communities and soci-
ety are often appropriated by the dominant culture which then pro-
jects negative representations of feminism. Most people have no
understanding of the myriad ways feminism has positively changed
all our lives. Sharing feminist thought and practice sustains feminist
movement. Feminist knowledge is for everybody.
5
OUR BODIES, OURSELVES
Reproductive Rights
When contemporary feminist movement began the issues that were
projected as most relevant were those that were directly linked to the
experiences of highly educated white women (most of whom were
materially privileged.) Since feminist movement followed in the
wake of civil rights and sexual liberation it seemed appropriate at the
time that issues around the female body were foregrounded. Con-
trary to the image the mass media presented to the world, a feminist
movement starting with women burning bras at a Miss America
pageant and then later images of women seeking abortions, one of
the first issues which served as a catalyst for the formation of the
movement was sexuality -
the issue being the rights of women to
choose when and with whom they would be sexual. The sexual ex-
ploitation of women's bodies had been a common occurrence in
radical movements for social justice whether socialist, civil rights, etc.
When the so-called sexual revolution was at its peak the issue of
free love (which usually meant having as much sex as one wanted
with whomever one desired) brought females face to face with the
issue of unwanted pregnancy. Before there could be any gender equity
around the issue of free love women needed access to safe, effective con-
traceptives and abortions. While individual white women with class
privilege often had access to both these safeguards, most women

did not. Often individual women with class privilege were too
ashamed of unwanted pregnancy to make use of their more direct ac-
cess to responsible health care. The women of the late '60s and early
'70s who clamored for abortions had seen the tragedies of illegal
abortions, the misery of forced marriages as a consequence of un-
wanted pregnancies. Many of us were the unplanned children of tal-
ented, creative women whose lives had been changed by unplanned
and unwanted pregnancies; we witnessed their bitterness, their rage,
their disappointment with their lot in life. And we were clear that
there could be no genuine sexual liberation for women and men
without better, safer contraceptives -
legal abortion.
without the right to a safe,
In retrospect, it is evident that highlighting abortion rather than
reproductive rights as a whole reflected the class biases of the
women who were at the forefront of the movement. While the issue
of abortion was and remains relevant to all women, there were other
reproductive issues that were just as vital which needed attention
and might have served to galvanize masses. These issues ranged from
basic sex education, prenatal care, preventive health care that would
help females understand how their bodies worked, to forced steril-
ization, unnecessary cesareans and/or hysterectomies, and the
medical complications they left in their wake. Of all these issues in-
dividual white women with class privilege identified most intimately
with the pain of unwanted pregnancy. And they highlighted the
abortion issue. They were not by any means the only group in need of
access to safe, legal abortions. As already stated, they were far more
likely to have the means to acquire an abortion than poor and work-
ing-class women. In those days poor women, black women included,
often sought illegal abortions. The right to have an abortion was not a
white-women-only issue; it was simply not the only or even the most
important reproductive concern for masses of American women.
OUR BODIES, OURSELVES
27
The development of effective though not totally safe birth con-
trol pills (created by male scientists, most of whom were not anti-
sexist) truly paved the way for female sexual liberation more so than
abortion rights. Women like myself who were in our late teens when
the pill was first widely available were spared the fear and shame of
unwanted pregnancies. Responsible birth control liberated many
women like myself who were pro-choice but not necessarily pro-
abortion for ourselves from having to personally confront the issue.
While I never had an unwanted pregnancy in the heyday of sexual
liberation, many of my peers saw abortion as a better choice than
conscious, vigilant use of birth control pills. And they did frequently
use abortion as a means of birth control. Using the pill meant a
woman was directly confronting her choice to be sexually active.
Women who were more conscientious about birth control were of-
ten regarded as sexually loose by men. It was easier for some females
just to let things happen sexually then take care of the "problem"
later with abortions. We now know that both repeated abortions or
prolonged use of birth control pills with high levels of estrogen are
not risk-free. Yet women were willing to take risks to have sexual
freedom - to have the right to choose.
The abortion issue captured the attention of mass media be-
cause it really challenged the fundamentalist thinking of Christianity.
It directly challenged the notion that a woman's reason for existence
was to bear children. It called the nation's attention to the female
body as no other issue could have done. It was a direct challenge to
the church. Later all the other reproductive issues that feminist
thinkers called attention to were often ignored by mass media. The
long-range medical problems from cesareans and hysterectomies
were not juicy subjects for mass media; they actually called attention
to a capitalist patriarchal male-dominated medical system that con-
trolled women's bodies and did with them anything they wanted to

do. To focus on gender injustice in these arenas would have been
too radical for a mass media which remains deeply conservative and
for the most part anti-feminist.
No feminist activists in the late '60s and early '70s imagined that
we would have to wage a battle for women's reproductive rights in
the '90s. Once feminist movement created the cultural revolution
which made the use of relatively risk-free contraceptives acceptable
and the right to have a safe, legal abortion possible women simply
assumed those rights would no longer be questioned. The demise of
an organized, radical feminist mass-based political movement cou-
pled with anti-feminist backlash from an organized right-wing polit-
ical front which relies on fundamentalist interpretations of religion
placed abortion back on the political agenda. The right of females to
choose is now called into question.
Sadly the anti-abortion platform has most viciously targeted
state-funded, inexpensive, and, when need be, free abortions. As a
consequence women of all races who have class privilege continue
to have access to safe abortions - continue to have the right to
choose -
while materially disadvantaged women suffer. Masses of
poor and working-class women lose access to abortion when there
is no government funding available for reproductive rights health
care. Women with class privilege do not feel threatened when abor-
tions can be had only if one has lots of money because they can still
have them. But masses of women do not have class power. More
women than ever before are entering the ranks of the poor and indi-
gent. Without the right to safe, inexpensive, and free abortions they
lose all control over their bodies. If we return to a world where abor-
tions are only accessible to those females with lots of money we risk
the return of public policy that will aim to make abortion illegal. It's
already happening in many conservative states. Women of all classes
must continue to make abortions safe, legal, and affordable.
OUR BODIES, OURSELVES
29
The right of women to choose whether or not to have an abor-
tion is only one aspect of reproductive freedom. Depending on a
woman's age and circumstance of life the aspect of reproductive
rights that matters most will change. A sexually active woman in her
20s or 30s who finds birth control pills unsafe may one day face an
unwanted pregnancy and the right to have a legal, safe, inexpensive
abortion may be the reproductive issue that is most relevant. But
when she is menopausal and doctors are urging her to have a hyster-
ectomy that may be the most relevant reproductive rights issue.
As we seek to rekindle the flames of mass-based feminist move-
ment reproductive rights will remain a central feminist agenda. If
women do not have the right to choose what happens to our bodies
we risk relinquishing rights in all other areas of our lives. In renewed
feminist movement the overall issue of reproductive rights will take
precedence over any single issue. This does not meant that the push
for legal, safe, inexpensive abortions will not remain central, it will
simply not be the only issue that is centralized. If sex education, pre-
ventive health care, and easy access to contraceptives are offered to
every female, fewer of us will have unwanted pregnancies. As a con-
sequence the need for abortions would diminish.
Losing ground on the issue of legal, safe, inexpensive abortion
means that women lose ground on all reproductive issues. The
anti-choice movement is fundamentally anti-feminist. While it is
possible for women to individually choose never to have an abor-
tion, allegiance to feminist politics means that they still are pro-choice,
that they support the right of females who need abortions to choose
whether or not to have them. Young females who have always had
access to effective contraception - who have never witnessed the
tragedies caused by illegal abortions -
have no firsthand experience
of the powerlessness and vulnerability to exploitation that will al-
ways be the outcome if females do not have reproductive right
Ongoing discussion about the wide range of issues that come under
the heading of reproductive rights is needed if females of all ages
and our male allies in struggle are to understand why these rights are
important. This understanding is the basis of our commitment to
keeping reproductive rights a reality for all females. Feminist focus
on reproductive rights is needed to protect and sustain our freedom.
6
BEAUTY WITHIN AND WITHOUT
Challenging sexist thinking about the female body was one of the
most powerful interventions made by contemporary feminist move-
ment. Before women's liberation all females young and old were so-
cialized by sexist thinking to believe that our value rested solely on
appearance and whether or not we were perceived to be good look-
ing, especially by men. Understanding that females could never be
liberated if we did not develop healthy self-esteem and self-love
feminist thinkers went directly to the heart of the matter - critically
examining how we feel and think about our bodies and offering con-
structive strategies for change. Looking back after years of feeling
comfortable choosing whether or not to wear a bra, I can remember
what a momentous decision this was 30 years ago. Women stripping
their bodies of unhealthy and uncomfortable, restrictive clothing-
bras, girdles, corsets, garter belts, etc. -
was a ritualistic, radical re-
claiming of the health and glory of the female body. Females today
who have never known such restrictions can only trust us when we
say that this reclaiming was momentous.
On a deeper level this ritual validated women wearing comfort-
able clothing on all levels in our lives. Just to be able to wear pants to
work was awesome to many women, whose jobs had required them
to be constantly bending and stooping over. For women who had

never been comfortable in dresses and skirts all these changes were
exciting. Today they can appear trivial to females who have been
able to freely choose what they want to wear from childhood on.
Many adult women embracing feminism stopped wearing crippling,
uncomfortable high-heeled shoes. These changes led the shoe-
making industry to design comfortable low shoes for women. No
longer forced by sexist tradition to wear make-up, women looked in
the mirror and learned to face ourselves just the way we are.
The clothing and revolution created by feminist interventions
let females know that our flesh was worthy oflove and adoration in its
natural state; nothing had to be added unless a woman chose further
adornment. Initially, capitalist investors in the cosmetic and fashion
industry feared that feminism would destroy their business. They
put their money behind mass-media campaigns which trivialized
women's liberation by portraying images which suggested feminists
were big, hypermasculine, and just plain old ugly. In reality, women
involved in feminist movement came in all shapes and sizes. We
were utterly diverse. And how thrilling to be free to appreciate our
differences without judgment or competition.
There was a period in the early days of feminism when many ac-
tivists abdicated all interest in fashion and appearance. These indi-
viduals often harshly critiqued any woman who showed an interest
in frilly feminine attire or make-up. Most of us were excited to have
options. And given choice, we usually decided in the direction of
comfort and ease. It has never been a simple matter for women to
unite a love of beauty and style with comfort and ease. Women had
to demand that the fashion industry (which was totally
male-dominated in those days) create diverse styles of clothing. Maga-
zines changed (feminist activists called for more women writers and
articles on serious subjects). For the first time in our nation's history
women were compelled to acknowledge the strength of our con-
BEAUTY WITHIN AND WITHOUT
33
sumer dollars, using that power to create positive change.
Challenging the industry of sexist-defined fashion opened up
the space for females to examine for the first time in our lives the
pathological, life-threatening aspects of appearance obsession.
Compulsive eating and compulsive starvation were highlighted.
While they created different "looks," these life-threatening addic-
tions had the same root. Feminist movement compelled the sexist
medical establishment to pay attention to these issues. Initially this
establishment ignored feminist critique. But when feminists began
to create health centers, providing a space for female-centered, posi-
tive health care, the medical industry realized that, as with fashion,
masses of women would take their consumer dollars and move in
the direction of those health care facilities which provided the
greater care, ease, and respect for women's bodies. All the positive
changes in the medical establishment's attitudes towards the female
body, towards female health care, are the direct outcome of feminist
struggle. When it comes to the issue of medical care, of taking our
bodies seriously, women continue to challenge and confront the
medical industry. This is one of the few places where feminist strug-
gle garners mass support from women, whether they are or are not
committed to feminist politics. We see the collective power of
women when it comes to gynecological matters, to those forms of
cancer (especially breast cancer) that threaten females more than
males, and more recently in the area of heart disease.
Feminist struggle to end eating disorders has been an ongoing
battle because our nation's obsession with judging females of all
ages on the basis of how we look was never completely eliminated.
It continues to grip our cultural imagination. By the early '80s many
women were moving away from feminism. While all females reaped
the benefits of feminist interventions, more and more females
were embracing anew sexist-defined notions of beauty. Individu
women who had been in their early 20s when contemporary femi-
nist movement began were moving into their late 40s and 50s. Even
though feminist changes in the way we see female bodies have made
aging a more positive experience for women, facing the reality of ag-
ing in patriarchal society, particularly the reality of no longer being
able biologically to bear children, led many women to adopt anew
the old sexist notions of feminine beauty.
Nowadays, more than ever before in our nation's history, a huge
number of heterosexual women past 40 were and are still single.
Finding themselves in competition with younger women (many of
whom are not and will never be feminist) for male attention they of-
ten emulate sexist representations of female beauty. Certainly it was
in the interest of a white supremacist capitalist patriarchal fashion
and cosmetic industry to re-glamorize sexist-defined notions of
beauty. Mass media has followed suit. In movies, on television, and
in public advertisements images of reed-thin, dyed-blonde women
looking as though they would kill for a good meal have become the
norm. Back with a vengeance, sexist images of female beauty
abound and threaten to undo much of the progress gained by femi-
nist interventions.
Tragically, even though females are more aware than ever be-
fore of the widespread problem of life-threatening eating disorders
in our nation's history, a large group of females from the very young
to the very old are still starving themselves to be thin. The disease of
anorexia has become a commonplace theme, a subject in books,
movies, etc. But no dire warnings work to deter females who believe
their worth, beauty, and intrinsic value will be determined by
whether or not they are thin. Today's fashion magazines may carry
an article about the dangers of anorexia while bombarding its read-
ers with images of emaciated young bodies representing the height
of beauty and desirability. The confusing message is most damaging
BEAUTY WITHIN AND WITHOUT
35
to those females who have never claimed a feminist politics. Yet
there are recent feminist interventions aimed at renewing our efforts
to affirm the natural beauty of female bodies.
Girls today are often just as self-hating when it comes to their
bodies as their pre-feminist counterparts were. While feminist move-
ment produced many types of pro-female magazines, no feminist-
oriented fashion magazine appeared to offer all females alternative
visions of beauty. To critique sexist images without offering alterna-
tives is an incomplete intervention. Critique in and of itself does not
lead to change. Indeed, much feminist critique of beauty has merely
left females confused about what a healthy choice is. As a middle-aged
woman gaining more weight than ever before in my life, I want to
work at shedding pounds without deploying sexist body self-hatred
to do so. Nowadays, in a fashion world, especially on the consumer
side, where clothing that looks like it has been designed simply for
reed-thin adolescent girl bodies is the norm, all females no matter
their age are being socialized either consciously or unconsciously to
have anxiety about their body, to see flesh as problematic. While we
are fortunate that some stores carry beautiful clothing for women of
all sizes and shapes, often this clothing is far more pricey than the
cheaper clothing the fashion industry markets towards the general
public. Increasingly today's fashion magazines look like the maga-
zines of the past. More and more bylines are by males. Seldom do ar-
ticles have a feminist perspective or feminist content. And the
fashions portrayed tend to reflect sexist sensibility.
These changes have been unacknowledged publicly because so
many of the feminist women who have come to mature adulthood
exercise their freedom of choice and seek healthy alternative models
of beauty. However, if we abandon the struggle to eliminate sexist
defined notions of beauty altogether, we risk undermining all the
marvelous feminist interventions which allowed us to embrace o
bodies and ourselves and love them. Although all females are more
aware of the pitfalls and dangers of embracing sexist notions of fe-
male beauty, we are not doing enough to eliminate those dangers -
to create alternatives.
Young girls and adolescents will not know that feminist think-
ers acknowledge both the value of beauty and adornment if we con-
tinue to allow patriarchal sensibilities to inform the beauty industry
in all spheres. Rigid feminist dismissal of female longings for beauty
has undermined feminist politics. While this sensibility is more un-
common, it is often presented by mass media as the way feminists
think. Until feminists go back to the beauty industry, go back to
fashion, and create an ongoing, sustained revolution, we will not be
free. We will not know how to love our bodies as ourselves.
7
FEMINIST CLASS STRUGGLE
Class difference and the way in which it divides women was an issue
women in feminist movement talked about long before race. In the
mostly white circles of a newly formed women's liberation move-
ment the most glaring separation between women was that of class.
White working-class women recognized that class hierarchies were
present in the movement. Conflict arose between the reformist vi-
sion of women's liberation which basically demanded equal rights
for women within the existing class structure, and more radical
and/ or revolutionary models, which called for fundamental change
in the existing structure so that models of mutuality and equality
could replace the old paradigms. However, as feminist movement
progressed and privileged groups of well-educated white women be-
gan to achieve equal access to class power with their male counter-
parts, feminist class struggle was no longer deemed important.
From the onset of the movement women from privileged
classes were able to make their concerns "the" issues that should be
focused on in part because they were the group of women who re-
ceived public attention. They attracted mass media. The issues that
were most relevant to working women or masses of women were
never highlighted by mainstream mass media. Betty Friedan's The
Feminist Mystique identified "the problem that has no name" as the

dissatisfaction females felt about being confined and subordinated
in the home as housewives. While this issue was presented as a crisis
for women it really was only a crisis for a small group of well-educated
white women. While they were complaining about the dangers of
confinement in the home a huge majority of women in the nation
were in the workforce. And many of these working women, who put in
long hours for low wages while still doing all the work in the domes-
tic household would have seen the right to stay home as "freedom."
It was not gender discrimination or sexist oppression that kept
privileged women of all races from working outside the home, it was
the fact that the jobs that would have been available to them would
have been the same low-paying unskilled labor open to all working
women. Elite groups of highly educated females stayed at home
rather than do the type of work large numbers of lower-middle-class
and working-class women were doing. Occasionally, a few of these
women defied convention and worked outside the home perform-
ing tasks way below their educational skills and facing resistance
from husbands and family. It was this resistance that turned the is-
sue of their working outside the home into an issue of gender dis-
crimination and made opposing patriarchy and seeking equal rights
with men of their class the political platform that chose feminism
rather than class struggle.
From the outset, reformist white women with class privilege
were well aware that the power and freedom they wanted was the
freedom they perceived men of their class enjoying. Their resistance
to patriarchal male domination in the domestic household provided
them with a connection they could use to unite across class with
other women who were weary of male domination. But only privi-
leged women had the luxury to imagine working outside the home
would actually provide them with an income which would enable
them to be economically self-sufficient. Working-class women al-
FEMINIST CLASS STRUGGLE
39
ready knew that the wages they received would not liberate them.
Reformist efforts on the part of privileged groups of women to
change the workforce so that women workers would be paid more
and face less gender-based discrimination and harassment on the
job had positive impact on the lives of all women. And these gains
are important. Yet the fact that the privileged gained in class power
while masses of women still do not receive wage equity with men is
an indication of the way in which class interests superceded feminist
efforts to change the workforce so that women would receive equal
pay for equal work.
Lesbian feminist thinkers were among the first activists to raise
the issue of class in feminist movement expressing their viewpoints
in an accessible language. They were a group of women who had not
imagined they could depend on husbands to support them. And
they were often much more aware than their straight counterparts of
the difficulties all women would face in the workforce. In the early
'70s anthologies like Class and Feminism) edited by Charlotte Bunch
and Nancy Myron, published work written by women from diverse
class backgrounds who were confronting the issue in feminist cir-
cles. Each essay emphasized the fact that class was not simply a
question of money. In "The Last Straw," Rita Mae Brown (who was
not a famous writer at the time) clearly stated:
Class is much more than Marx's definition of relationship to the
means of production. Class involved your behavior, your basic
assumptions, how you are taught to behave, what you expect
from yourself and from others, your concept of a future, how you
understand problems and solve them, how you think, feel, act.
These women who entered feminist groups made up of diverse
classes were among the first to see that the vision of a politically
based sisterhood where all females would unite together to fight p
triarchy could not emerge until the issue of class was confronted.
Placing class on feminist agendas opened up the space where
the intersections of class and race were made apparent. Within the
institutionalized race, sex, class social system in our society black fe-
males were clearly at the bottom of the economic totem pole. Ini-
tially, well-educated white women from working-class backgrounds
were more visible than black females of all classes in feminist move-
ment. They were a minority within the movement, but theirs was the
voice of experience. They knew better than their privileged- class
comrades of any race the costs of resisting race, class, and gender
domination. They knew what it was like to struggle to change one's
economic situation. Between them and their privileged-class com-
rades there were ongoing conflicts over appropriate behavior, over
the issues that would be presented as fundamental feminist con-
cerns. Within feminist movement women from privileged-class
backgrounds who had never before been involved in leftist freedom
fighting learned the concrete politics of class struggle, confronting
challenges made by less privileged women, and also learning in the
process assertiveness skills and constructive ways to cope with con-
flict. Despite constructive intervention many privileged white
women continued to act as though feminism belonged to them, as
though they were in charge.
Mainstream patriarchy reinforced the idea that the concerns of
women from privileged-class groups were the only ones worthy of
receiving attention. Feminist reform aimed to gain social equality for
women within the existing structure. Privileged women wanted
equality with men of their class. Despite sexism among their class
they would not have wanted to have the lot of working class men.
Feminist efforts to grant women social equality with men of their
class neatly coincided with white supremacist capitalist patriarchal
fears that white power would diminish if nonwhite people gained
FEMINIST CLASS STRUGGLE
41
equal access to economic power and privilege. Supporting what in
effect became white power reformist feminism enabled the main-
stream white supremacist patriarchy to bolster its power while si-
multaneously undermining the radical politics of feminism.
Only revolutionary feminist thinkers expressed outrage at this
cooptation of feminist movement. Our critique and outrage gained
a hearing the alternative press. In her collection of essays, The Coming
if Black Genocide, radical white activist Mary Barfoot boldly stated:
There are white women, hurt and angry, who believed that the
'70s women's movement meant sisterhood, and who feel be-
trayed by escalator women. By women who went back home to
the patriarchy. But the women's movement never left the father
Dick's side .... There was no war. And there was no liberation. We
got a share of genocide profits and we love it. We are Sisters of
Patriarchy, and true supporters of national and class oppression,
Patriarchy in its highest form is Euro-imperialism on a world
scale. If we're Dick's sister and want what he has gotten, then in
the end we support that system that he got it all from.
Indeed, many more feminist women found and find it easier to con-
sider divesting of white supremacist thinking than of their class elitism.
As privileged women gained greater access to economic power
with men of their class feminist discussions of class were no longer
commonplace. Instead, all women were encouraged to see the eco-
nomic gains of affluent females as a positive sign for all women. In
actuality, these gains rarely changed the lot of poor and work-
ing-class women. And since privileged men did not become equal
caretakers in the domestic household, the freedom of privileged-class
women of all races has required the sustained subordination of
working-class and poor women. In the '90s collusion with the exist-
ing social structure was the price of "women's liberation." At the
end of the day class power proved to be more important than femi-

nism. And this collusion helped destabilize feminist movement.
When women acquired greater class status and power without
conducting themselves differently from males feminist politics were
undermined. Lots of women felt betrayed. Middle- and lower-middle-
class women who were suddenly compelled by the ethos of femi-
nism to enter the workforce did not feel liberated once they faced
the hard truth that working outside the home did not mean work in
the home would be equally shared with male partners. No-fault di-
vorce proved to be more economically beneficial to men than
women. As many black women/women of color saw white women
from privileged classes benefiting economically more than other
groups from reformist feminist gains, from gender being tacked on
to racial affirmative action, it simply reaffirmed their fear that femi-
nism was really about increasing white power. The most profound
betrayal of feminist issues has been the lack of mass-based feminist
protest challenging the government's assault on single mothers and
the dismantling of the welfare system. Privileged women, many of
whom call themselves feminists, have simply turned away from the
"feminization of poverty."
The voices of "power feminism" tend to be highlighted in mass
media far more than the voices of individual feminist women who
have gained class power without betraying our solidarity towards
those groups without class privilege. Being true to feminist politics,
our goals were and are to become economically self-sufficient and to
find ways to assist other women in their efforts to better themselves
economically. Our experiences counter the assumption that women
can only gain economically by acting in collusion with the existing
capitalist patriarchy. All over this nation individual feminists with
class power who support a revolutionary vision of social change
share resources and use our power to aid reforms that will improve
the lives of women irrespective of class.
FEMINIST CLASS STRUGGLE
43
The only genuine hope of feminist liberation lies with a vision
of social change which challenges class elitism. Western women
have gained class power and greater gender inequality because a
global white supremacist patriarchy enslaves and/or subordinates
masses of third-world women. In this country the combined forces
of a booming prison industry and workfare-oriented welfare in con-
junction with conservative immigration policy create and condone
the conditions for indentured slavery. Ending welfare will create a
new underclass of women and children to be abused and exploited
by the existing structures of domination.
Given the changing realities of class in our nation, widening
gaps between the rich and poor, and the continued feminization of
poverty, we desperately need a mass-based radical feminist move-
ment that can build on the strength of the past, including the positive
gains generated by reforms, while offering meaningful interrogation
of existing feminist theory that was simply wrongminded while of-
fering us new strategies. Significantly a visionary movement would
ground its work in the concrete conditions of working-class and
poor women. That means creating a movement that begins education
for critical consciousness where women, feminist women with class
power, need to put in place low-income housing women can own.
The creation of housing co-ops with feminist principles would show
the ways feminist struggle is relevant to all women's lives.
When women with class power opportunistically use a feminist
platform while undermining feminist politics that help keep in place
a patriarchal system that will ultimately re-subordinate them, they do
not just betray feminism; they betray themselves. Returning to a dis-
cussion of class, feminist women and men will restore the condi-
tions needed for solidarity. We will then be better able to envision a
world where resources are shared and opportunities for personal
growth abound for everyone irrespective of their class.
8
GLOBAL FEMINISM
Individual female freedom fighters all over the world have single-
handedly struggled against patriarchy and male domination. Since
the first people on the planet earth were nonwhite it is unlikely that
white women were the first females to rebel against male domina-
tion. In white supremacist capitalist patriarchal Western culture
neocolonial thinking sets the tone for many cultural practices. That
thinking always focuses on who has conquered a territory, who has
ownership, who has the right to rule. Contemporary feminist poli-
tics did not come into being as a radical response to neocolonialism.
Privileged-class white women swiftly declared their "owner-
ship" of the movement, placing working-class white women, poor
white women, and all women of color in the position of followers. It
did not matter how many working-class white women or individual
black women spearheaded the women's movement in radical direc-
tions. At the end of the day white women with class power declared
that they owned the movement, that they were the leaders and the
rest of merely followers. Parasitic class relations have overshadowed
issues of race, nation, and gender in contemporary neocolonialism.
And feminism did not remain aloof from that dynamic.
Initially when feminist leaders in the United States proclaimed
the need for gender equality here they did not seek to find out if cor-
44
GLOBAL FEMINISM
45
\
1\
responding movements were taking place among women around
the world. Instead they declared themselves liberated and therefore
in the position to liberate their less fortunate sisters, especially those
in the "third world." This neocolonial paternalism had already been
enacted to keep women of color in the background so that only con-
servative/liberal white women would be the authentic representa-
tives of feminism. Radical white women tend not to be
"represented," and, if represented at all, they are depicted as a fringe
freak element. No wonder then that the "power feminism" of the
'90s offers wealthy white heterosexual women as the examples of
feminist success.
In truth their hegemonic takeover of feminist rhetoric about
equality has helped mask their allegiance to the ruling classes within
white supremacist capitalist patriarchy. Radical feminists were dis-
mayed to witness so many women (of all races) appropriating feminist
jargon while sustaining their commitment to Western imperialism
and transnational capitalism. While feminists in the United States
were right to call attention to the need for global equality for
women, problems arose as those individual feminists with class
power projected imperialist fantasies onto women globally, the ma-
jor fantasy being that women in the United States have more rights
than any group of women globally, are "free" if they want to be, and
therefore have the right to lead feminist movement and set feminist
agendas for all the other women in the world, particularly women in
third world countries. Such thinking merely mirrors the imperialist
racism and sexism of ruling groups of Western men.
Most women in the United States do not even know or use the
terms colonialism and neocolonialism. Most American women, par-
ticularly white women, have not decolonized their thinking either in
relation to the racism, sexism, and class elitism they hold towards
less powerful groups of women in this society or the masses of
H
I
I
women globally. When unenlightened individual feminist thinkers
addressed global issues of gender exploitation and oppression they
did and do so from a perspective of neocolonialism. Significantly,
radical white women writing in Night-Vision: Illuminating War and
Class on the Neo-Colonial Terrain emphasize the reality that" to not un-
derstand neocolonialism is to not fully live in the present." Since un-
enlightened white feminists were unwilling to acknowledge the
spheres of American life where they acted and act in collusion with
imperialist white supremacist capitalist patriarchy, sustained protest
and resistance on the part of black women/women of color and our
radical white sisters was needed to break the wall of denial.
Yet even when large numbers of feminist activists adopted a
perspective which included race, gender, class, and nationality, the
white "power feminists" continued to project an image of feminism
that linked and links women's equality with imperialism. Global
women's issues like forced female circumcision, sex clubs in Thai-
land, the veiling of women in Africa, India, the Middle East, and Eu-
rope, the killing of female children in China, remain important
concerns. However feminist women in the West are still struggling
to decolonize feminist thinking and practice so that these issues can
be addressed in a manner that does not reinscribe Western imperial-
ism. Consider the way many Western women, white and black, have
confronted the issue of female circumcision in Africa and the Mid-
dle East. Usually these countries are depicted as "barbaric and un-
civilized," the sexism there portrayed as more brutal and dangerous
to women than the sexism here in the United States.
A decolonized feminist perspective would first and foremost
examine how sexist practices in relation to women's bodies globally
are linked. For example: linking circumcision with life-threatening
eating disorders (which are the direct consequence of a culture im-
posing thinness as a beauty ideal) or any life-threatening cosmetic
GLOBAL FEMINISM
47
surgery wo.uld emphasize that the sexism, the misogyny, underlying
~hese practJces globally mirror the sexism here in this country. When
Issues are addressed in this manner Western imperialism is not
reinscribed and feminism cannot be appropriated by transnational
capitalism as yet another luxury product from the West women in
other cultures must fight to have the right to consume.
Until radic.al women in the United States challenge those groups
of women pOSIng as feminists in the interest of class opportunism,
the tone of global feminism in the West will continue to be set by
those with the greatest class power who hold old biases. Radical
feminist work around the world daily strengthens political solidarity
~etwe.en women beyond the boundaries of race/ ethnicity and na-
t~on~lity. Mainstream mass media rarely calls attention to these posi-
tJve Interventions. In Hatreds: Racialized and Sexualized Conflicts in the
21 st Century, Zillah Eisenstein shares the insight:
Feminism(s) as transnational- imagined as the rejection of false
race/gender borders and falsely constructed "other" -
is a major
challenge to masculinist nationalism, the distortions of statist
communism and "free"-market globalism. It is a feminism that
recognizes individual diversity, and freedom, and equality, de-
fined through and beyond north/west and south/ east dialogues.
~o one who has studied the growth of global feminism can deny the
Important work women are doing to ensure our freedom. No one can
deny that Western women, particularly women in the United States
have contributed much that is needed to this struggle and need t~
contribute more. The goal of global feminism is to reach out and join
global struggles to end sexism, sexist exploitation, and oppression.
:!
9
WOMEN AT WORI(
More than half of all women in the United States are
In
the
workforce. When contemporary feminist movement first began the
workforce was already more than one-third female. Coming from a
working-class, African-American background where most women I
knew were in the workforce, I was among the harshest critics of the
vision of feminism put forth by reformist thinkers when the move-
ment began, which suggested that work would liberate women from
male domination. More than 10 years ago I wrote in Feminist Theory:
From Margin to Center. "The emphasis on work as the key to women's
liberation led many white feminist activists to suggest women who
worked were 'already liberated.' They were in effect saying to the
.
'
majority of working women, 'Feminist movement 1S not :or you .. "
Most importantly I knew firsthand that working for low wages did
not liberate poor and working-class women from male domination.
When reformist feminist thinkers from privileged class back-
grounds whose primary agenda was achieving social equality with
men of their class equated work with liberation they meant
high-paying careers. Their vision of work had little relevanc~ for
masses of women. Importantly the aspect of feminist emphas1s on
work which did affect all women was the demand for equal pay for
equal work. Women gained more rights in relation to salaries and
48
WOMEN AT WORK
49
positions as a result of feminist protest but it has not completely
eliminated gender discrimination. In many college classrooms today
students both female and male will argue that feminist movement is
no longer relevant since women now have equality. They do not
even know that on the average most women still do not get equal
pay for equal work, that we are more likely to make seventy-three
cents for every dollar a male makes.
We know now that work does not liberate women from male
domination. Indeed, there are many high-paid professional women,
many rich women, who remain in relationships with men where
male domination is the norm. Positively we do know that if a
woman has access to economic self-sufficiency she is more likely to
leave a relationship where male domination is the norm when she
chooses liberation. She leaves because she can. Lots of women en-
gage feminist thinking, choose liberation, but are economically tied
to patriarchal males in ways that make leaving difficult if not down-
right impossible. Most women know now what some of us knew
when the movement began, that work would not necessarily liberate
us, but that this fact does not change the reality that economic
self-sufficiency is needed if women are to be liberated. When we talk
about economic self-sufficiency as liberating rather than work, we
then have to take the next step and talk about what type of work lib-
erates. Clearly better-paying jobs with comfortable time schedules
tend to offer the greatest degree of freedom to the worker.
Masses of women feel angry because they were encouraged by
feminist thinking to believe they would find liberation in the work-
force. Mostly they have found that they work long hours at home
and long hours at the job. Even before feminist movement encour-
aged women to feel positive about working outside the home, the
needs of a depressed economy were already sanctioning this shift. If
contemporary feminist movement had never taken place masses 
women would still have entered the workforce, but it is unlikely that
we would have the rights we have, had feminists not challenged gen-
der discrimination. Women are wrong to "blame" feminism for
making it so they have to work, which is what many women thi~k.
The truth remains that consumer capitalism was the force leading
more women into the workforce. Given the depressed economy
white middle-class families would be unable to sustain their class
status and their lifestyles if women who had once dreamed solely of
working as housewives had not chosen to work outside the home.
Feminist scholarship has documented that the positive benefits
masses of women have gained by entering the workforce have more
to do with increased self-esteem and positive participation in com-
munity. No matter her class the woman who stayed at home wor.k-
ing as a housewife was often isolated, lonely, and depressed. Whlle
most workers do not feel secure at work, whether they are male or
female, they do feel part of something larger than themselves. While
problems at home cause greater stress and are difficult to solve,
those in the workplace are shared by everyone, and the attempt to
find solutions is not an isolated one. When men did most of the
work women worked to make home a site of comfort and relaxation
for males. Home was relaxing to women only when men and chil-
dren were not present. When women in the home spend all their
time attending to the needs of others, home is a workplace for her,
not a site of relaxation, comfort, and pleasure. Work outside the
home has been most liberating for women who are single (many of
whom live alone; they mayor may not be heterosexual). Most
women have not even been able to find satisfying work, and their
participation in the workforce has diminished the quality of their life
at home.
Groups of highly educated privileged women previously unem-
ployed or marginally employed were able through feminist changes
WOMEN AT WORK
51
in job discrimination to have greater access to work that satisfies,
that serves as a base for economic self-sufficiency. Their success has
not altered the fate of masses of women. Years ago in Feminist Theory:
From Margin to Center I stated:
If improving conditions in the workplace for women had been a
central agenda for feminist movement in conjunction with efforts
to obtain better-paying jobs for women and finding jobs for un-
employed women of all classes, feminism would have been seen
as a movement addressing the concerns of all women. Feminist
focus on careerism, getting women employed in high-paying pro-
fessions, not only alienated masses of women from feminist
movement; it also allowed feminist activists to ignore the fact that
increased entry of bourgeois women into the work force was not
a sign that women as a group were gaining economic power. Had
they looked at the economic situation of poor and working-class
women, they would have seen the growing problem of unem-
ployment and increased entry of women from all classes into the
ranks of the poor.
Poverty has become a central woman's issue. White supremacist
capitalist patriarchal attempts to dismantle the welfare system in our
society will deprive poor and indigent women of access to even the
most basic necessities of life: shelter and food. Indeed a return to
patriarchal male-dominated households where men are providers is
the solution offered women by conservative politicians who ignore
the reality of mass unemployment for both women and men, and
the fact that jobs simply are not there and that many men do not
want to provide economically for women and children even if they
have wages.
There is no feminist agenda in place offering women a way
out - a way to rethink work. Since the cost of living in our society is
high, work does not lead to economic self-sufficiency for mo
workers, women included. Yet economic self-sufficiency is needed
if all women are to be free to choose against male domination, to be
fully self-actualized.
The path to greater economic self-sufficiency will necessarily
lead to alternative lifestyles which will run counter to the image of
the good life presented to us by white supremacist capitalist patriar-
chal mass media. To live fully and well, to do work which enhances
self-esteem and self-respect while being paid a living wage, we will
need programs of job sharing. Teachers and service workers in all
areas will need to be paid more. Women and men who want to stay
home and raise children should have wages subsidized by the state
as well as home-schooling programs that will enable them to finish
high school and work on graduate degrees at home. With advanced
technology individuals who remain home should be able to study by
watching college courses on videos augmenting this with some pe-
riod of time spent in classroom settings. If welfare not warfare (mili-
tary spending) was sanctioned by our government and all citizens
legally had access to a year or two of their lives during which they re-
ceived state aid if they were unable to find a job, then the negative
stigma attached to welfare programs would no longer exist. If men
had equal access to welfare then it would no longer carry the stigma
of gender.
A growing class divide separates masses of poor women from
their privileged counterparts. Indeed much of the class power elite
groups of women hold in our society, particularly those who are
rich, is gained at the expense of the freedom of other women. Al-
ready there are small groups of women with class power working to
build bridges through economic programs which provide aid and
support to less privileged women. Individual wealthy women, par-
ticularly those with inherited wealth, who remain committed to fem-
inist liberation are developing strategies for participatory economics
WOMEN AT WORK
53
which show their concern for and solidarity with women who lack
class power. Right now these individuals are a small minority, but
their ranks will swell as their work becomes more well known.
Thirty years ago contemporary feminists did not foresee the
changes that would happen in the world of work in our society. They
did not realize that mass unemployment would become more of a
norm, that women could prepare themselves for jobs that would sim-
ply not be there. They did not foresee the conservative and some-
times liberal assault on welfare, the way that single mothers without
money would be blamed for their economic plight and demonized.
All these unforeseen realities require visionary feminist thinkers to
think anew about the relationship between liberation and work.
While much feminist scholarship tells us about the role of
women in the workforce today and how it changes their sense of self
and their role in the home, we do not have many studies which tell
us whether more women working has positively changed male dom-
ination. Many men blame women working for unemployment, for
their loss of the stable identity being seen as patriarchal providers
gave them, even if it was or is only a fiction. An important feminist
agenda for the future has to be to realistically inform men about the
nature of women and work so that they can see that women in the
workforce are not their enemies.
Women have been in the workforce for a long time now.
Whether we are paid well or receive low wages many women have
not found work to be as meaningful as feminist utopian visions sug-
gested. When women work to make money to consume more rather
than to enhance the quality of our lives on all levels, work does not
lead to economic self-sufficiency. More money does not mean more
freedom if our finances are not used to facilitate well-being.
Rethinking the meaning of work is an important task for future fem-
inist movement. Addressing both ways women can leave the ran
of the poor as well as the strategies they can use to have a good life
even if there is substantial material lack are vital to the success of
feminist movement.
Early on feminist movement did not make ec~nomic self-
sufficiency for women its primary goal. Yet addressmg the eco-
nomic plight of women may ultimately be the feminist platform t~at
draws a collective response. It may well become the place of collectlve
organizing, the common ground, the issue that unites all women.
",
,
10
RACE AND GENDER
No intervention changed the face of American feminism more than
the demand that feminist thinkers acknowledge the reality of race
and racism. All white women in this nation know that their status is
different from that of black women/women of color. They know
this from the time they are little girls watching television and seeing
only their images, and looking at magazines and seeing only their im-
ages. They know that the only reason nonwhites are absent/invisi-
ble is because they are not white. All white women in this nation
know that whiteness is a privileged category. The fact that white fe-
males may choose to repress or deny this knowledge does not mean
they are ignorant: it means that they are in denial.
No group of white women understood the differences in their
status and that of black women more than the group of politically
conscious white females who were active in civil rights struggle. Dia-
ries and memoirs of this period in American history written by white
women document this knowledge. Yet many of these individuals
moved from civil rights into women's liberation and spearheaded a
feminist movement where they suppressed and denied the aware-
ness of difference they had seen and heard articulated firsthand in
civil rights struggle. Just because they participated in anti-racist
struggle did not mean that they had divested of white supremacy, of

notions that they were superior to black females, more informed,
better educated, more suited to "lead" a movement.
In many ways they were following in the footsteps of their abo-
litionist ancestors who had demanded that everyone (white women
and black people) be given the right to vote, but, when faced with
the possibility that black males might gain the right to vote while
they were denied it on the basis of gender, they chose to ally them-
selves with men, uniting under the rubric of white supremacy. Con-
temporary white females witnessing the militant demand for more
rights for black people chose that moment to demand more rights
for themselves. Some of these individuals claim that it was working
on behalf of civil rights that made them aware of sexism and sexist
oppression. Yet if this was the whole picture one might think their
newfound political awareness of difference would have carried over
into the way they theorized contemporary feminist movement.
They entered the movement erasing and denying difference,
not playing race alongside gender, but eliminating race from the pic-
ture. Foregrounding gender meant that white women could take
center stage, could claim the movement as theirs, even as they called
on all women to join. The utopian vision of sisterhood evoked in a
feminist movement that initially did not take racial difference or
anti-racist struggle seriously did not capture the imagination of most
black women/women of color. Individual black women who were
active in the movement from its inception for the most part stayed
in their place. When the feminist movement began racial integration
was still rare. Many black people were learning how to interact with
whites on the basis of being peers for the first time in their lives. No
wonder individual black women choosing feminism were reluctant
to introduce their awareness of race. It must have felt so awesome to
have white women evoke sisterhood in a world where they had
mainly experienced white women as exploiters and oppressors.
RACE AND GENDER
57
A younger generation of black females/women of color in the
late '70s and early '80s challenged white female racism. Unlike our
older black women allies we had for the most part been educated in
predominantly white settings. Most of us had never been in a subor-
dinated position in relation to a white female. Most of us had not
been in the workforce. We had never been in our place. We were
better positioned to critique racism and white supremacy within the
women's movement. Individual white women who had attempted
to organize the movement around the banner of common oppres-
sion evoking the notion that women constituted a sexual class/ caste
were the most reluctant to acknowledge differences among women,
differences that overshadowed all the common experiences female
shared. Race was the most obvious difference.
In the '70s I wrote the first draft ofAin't I a Woman: Black Women
and Feminism. I was 19 years old. I had never worked a full-time job. I
had come from a racially segregated small town in the south to Stan-
ford University. While I had grown up resisting patriarchal thinking,
college was the place where I embraced feminist politics. It was
there as the only black female present in feminist classrooms, in
consciousness-raising, that I began to engage race and gender theo-
retically. It was there that I began to demand recognition of the way
in which racist biases were shaping feminist thinking and call for
change. At other locations individual black women/women of color
were making the same critique.
In those days white women who were unwilling to face the real-
ity of racism and racial difference accused us of being traitors by
introducing race. Wrongly they saw us as deflecting focus away from
gender. In reality, we were demanding that we look at the status of fe-
males realistically, and that realistic understanding serve as the foun-
dation for a real feminist politic. Our intent was not to diminish the
vision of sisterhood. We sought to put in place a concrete politics of sol
darity that would make genuine sisterhood possible. We knew that
there could no real sisterhood between white women and women of
color if white women were not able to divest of white supremacy, if
feminist movement were not fundamentally anti-racist.
Critical interventions around race did not destroy the women's
movement; it became stronger. Breaking through denial about race
helped women face the reality of difference on all levels. And we
were finally putting in place a movement that did not place the class
interests of privileged women, especially white women, over that of
all other women. We put in place a vision of sisterhood where all our
realities could be spoken. There has been no contemporary move-
ment for social justice where individual participants engaged in the
dialectical exchange that occurred among feminist thinkers about
race which led to the re-thinking of much feminist theory and prac-
tice. The fact that participants in the feminist movement could face
critique and challenge while still remaining wholeheartedly committed
to a vision of justice, of liberation, is a testament to the movement's
strength and power. It shows us that no matter how misguided femi-
nist thinkers have been in the past, the will to change, the will to cre-
ate the context for struggle and liberation, remains stronger than the
need to hold on to wrong beliefs and assumptions.
For years I witnessed the reluctance of white feminist thinkers
to acknowledge the importance of race. I witnessed their refusal to
divest of white supremacy, their unwillingness to acknowledge that
an anti-racist feminist movement was the only political foundation
that would make sisterhood be a reality. And I witnessed the revolu-
tion in consciousness that occurred as individual women began to
break free of denial, to break free of white supremacist thinking.
These awesome changes restore my faith in feminist movement and
strengthen the solidarity I feel towards all women.
Overall feminist thinking and feminist theory has benefited
RACE AND GENDER
59
from all critical interventions on the issue of race. The only prob-
lematic arena has been that of translating theory into practice. While
individual white women have incorporated an analysis of race into
much feminist scholarship, these insights have not had as much im-
pact on the day to day relations between white women and women
of color. Anti-racist interactions between women are difficult in a
society that remains racially segregated. Despite diverse work set-
tings a vast majority of folks still socialize only with people of their
own group. Racism and sexism combined create harmful barriers
between women. So far feminist strategies to change this have not
been very useful.
Individual white women and women of color who have worked
through difficulties to make the space where bonds of love and po-
litical solidarity can emerge need to share the methods and strategies
that we have successfully employed. Almost no attention is given
the relationship between girls of different races. Biased feminist
scholarship which attempts to show that white girls are somehow
more vulnerable to sexist conditioning than girls of color simply
perpetuates the white supremacist assumption that white females
require and deserve more attention to their concerns and ills than
other groups. Indeed while girls of color may express different be-
havior than their white counterparts they are not only internalizing
sexist conditioning, they are far more likely to be victimized by sex-
ism in ways that are irreparable.
Feminist movement, especially the work of visionary black ac-
tivists, paved the way for a reconsideration of race and racism that
has had positive impact on our society as a whole. Rarely do main-
stream social critiques acknowledge this fact. As a feminist theorist
who has written extensively about the issue of race and racism
within feminist movement, I know that there remains much that
needs to be challenged and changed, but it is equally important 
celebrate the enormous changes that have occurred. That celebra-
tion, understanding our triumphs and using them as models, means
that they can become the sound foundation for the building of a
mass-based anti-racist feminist movement.
11
ENDING VIOLENCE
By far one of the most widespread positive interventions of contem-
porary feminist movement remains the effort to create and sustain
greater cultural awareness of domestic violence as well as the
changes that must happen in our thinking and action if we are to see
its end. Nowadays the problem of domestic violence is talked about
in so many circles, from mass media to grade schools, that it is often
forgotten that contemporary feminist movement was the force that
dramatically uncovered and exposed the ongoing reality of domestic
violence. Initially feminist focus on domestic violence highlighted
male violence against women, but as the movement progressed evi-
dence showed that there was also domestic violence present in
same-sex relations, that women in relationships with Women were
and are oftentimes the victims of abuse, that children were also vic-
tims of adult patriarchal violence enacted by women and men.
Patriarchal violence in the home is based on the belief that it is
acceptable for a more powerful individual to control others through
various forms of coercive force. This expanded definition of do-
mestic violence includes male violence against women, same-sex vi-
olence, and adult violence against children. The term "patriarchal
violence" is useful because unlike the more accepted phrase "do-
mestic violence" it continually reminds the listener that violence in

celebrate the enormous changes that have occurred. That celebra-
tion, understanding our triumphs and using them as models, means
that they can become the sound foundation for the building of a
mass-based anti-racist feminist movement.
11
ENDING VIOLENCE
By far one of the most widespread positive interventions of contem-
porary feminist movement remains the effort to create and sustain
greater cultural awareness of domestic violence as well as the
changes that must happen in our thinking and action if we are to see
its end. Nowadays the problem of domestic violence is talked about
in so many circles, from mass media to grade schools, that it is often
forgotten that contemporary feminist movement was the force that
dramatically uncovered and exposed the ongoing reality of domestic
violence. Initially feminist focus on domestic violence highlighted
male violence against women, but as the movement progressed evi-
dence showed that there was also domestic violence present in
same-sex relations, that women in relationships with Women were
and are oftentimes the victims of abuse, that children were also vic-
tims of adult patriarchal violence enacted by women and men.
Patriarchal violence in the home is based on the belief that it is
acceptable for a more powerful individual to control others through
various forms of coercive force. This expanded definition of do-
mestic violence includes male violence against women, same-sex vi-
olence, and adult violence against children. The term "patriarchal
violence" is useful because unlike the more accepted phrase "do-
mestic violence" it continually reminds the listener that violence in

the home is connected to sexism and sexist thinking, to male domi-
nation. For too long the term domestic violence has been used as a
"soft" term which suggests it emerges in an intimate context that is
private and somehow less threatening, less brutal, than the violence
that takes place outside the home. This is not so, since more women
are beaten and murdered in the home than on the outside. Also
most people tend to see domestic violence between adults as sepa-
rate and distinct from violence against children when it is not. Often
children suffer abuse as they attempt to protect a mother who is be-
ing attacked by a male companion or husband, or they are emotion-
ally damaged by witnessing violence and abuse.
Just as a vast majority of citizens in this nation believe in equal
pay for equal work most folks believe that men should not beat
women and children. Yet when they are told that domestic violence
is the direct outcome of sexism, that it will not end until sexism ends,
they are unable to make this logical leap because it requires challeng-
ing and changing fundamental ways of thinking about gender. Sig-
nificantly, I am among those rare feminist theorists who believe that
it is crucial for feminist movement to have as an overriding agenda
ending all forms of violence. Feminist focus on patriarchal violence
against women should remain a primary concern. However empha-
sizing male violence against women in a manner which implies that
it is more horrendous than all other forms of patriarchal violence
does not serve to further the interests of feminist movement. It ob-
scures the reality that much patriarchal violence is directed at chil-
dren by sexist women and men.
In a zealous effort to call attention to male violence against
women reformist feminist thinkers still choose often to portray fe-
males as always and only victims. The fact that many violent attacks
on children are perpetrated by women is not equ~lly highlighted and
seen as another expression of patriarchal violence. We know now
ENDING VIOLENCE
63
that children are violated not only when they are the direct targets of
patriarchal violence but as well when they are forced to witness vio-
lent acts. Had all feminist thinkers expressed outrage at patriarchal
violence perpetrated by women, placing it on an equal footing with
male violence against women, it would have been and will be harder
for the public to dismiss attention given patriarchal violence by see-
ing it as an anti-male agenda.
Adults who have been the victims of patriarchal violence perpe-
trated by females know that women are not nonviolent no matter
the number of surveys that tell us women often are more inclined to
use nonviolence. The truth is that children have no organized collec-
tive voice to speak the reality of how often they are the objects of fe-
male violence. Were it not for the huge numbers of children seeking
medical attention because of violence done by women and men,
there might be no evidence documenting female violence.
I first raised these concerns in the chapter "Feminist Movement
to End Violence" in Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center, stating:
It is essential for continued feminist struggle to end violence
against women that this struggle be viewed as a component of an
overall movement to end violence. So far feminist movement has
primarily focused on male violence, and as a consequence lends
credibility to sexist stereotypes that suggest men are violent,
women are not; men are abusers, women are victims. This type of
thinking allows us to ignore the extent to which women (with
men) in this society accept and perpetuate the idea that it is ac-
ceptable for a dominant party or group to maintain power over
the dominated by using coercive force. It allows us to overlook or
ignore the extent to which women exert coercive authority over
others or act violently. The fact that women may not commit vio-
lent acts as often as men does not negate the reality of female vio-
lence. We must see both men and women in this society as groups
who support the use of violence if we are to eliminate i
A mother who might never be violent but who teaches her children,
especially her sons, that violence is an acceptable means of exerting
social control, is still in collusion with patriarchal violence. Her
thinking must be changed.
Clearly most women do not use violence to dominate men
(even though small numbers of women batter the men in their lives)
but lots of women believe that a person in authority has the right to
use force to maintain authority. A huge majority of parents use some
form of physical or verbal aggression against children. Since women
remain the primary caretakers of children, the facts confirm the real-
ity that given a hierarchal system in a culture of domination which
empowers females (like the parent-child relationship) all too often
they use coercive force to maintain dominance. In a culture of domi-
nation everyone is socialized to see violence as an acceptable means
of social control. Dominant parties maintain power by the threat
(acted upon or not) that abusive punishment, physical or psycholog-
ical , will be used whenever the hierarchal structures in place are
threatened, whether that be in male-female relationships, or parent
and child bonds.
Male violence agains t women has received much ongoing media
attention (highlighted by real-life court cases like the trial against
0.]. Simpson) but awareness has not led the American public to
challenge the underlying causes of this violence, to challenge patriar-
chy. Sexist thinking continues to support male domination and the
violence that is a consequence. Since masses of unemployed and
working-class men do not feel powerful on their jobs within white
supremacist patriarchy they are encouraged to feel that the one place
where they will have absolute authority and respect is in the home.
Men are socialized by ruling-class groups of men to accept domina-
tion in the public world of work and to believe that the private world
of home and intimate relationships will restore to them the sense of
ENDING VIOLENCE
65
power they equate with masculinity. As more men have entered the
ranks of the employed or receive low wages and more women have
entered the world of work, some men feel that the use of violence is
the only way they can establish and maintain power and dominance
within the sexist sex role hierarchy. Until they unlearn the sexist
thinking that tells them they have a right to rule over women by any
means, male violence against women will continue to be a norm.
Early on in feminist thinking activists often failed to liken male
violence against women to imperialist militarism. This linkage was
often not made because those who were against male violence were
often accepting and even supportive of militarism. As long as sexist
thinking socializes boys to be "killers," whether in imaginary good
guy, bad guy fights or as soldiers in imperialism to maintain coercive
power over nations, patriarchal violence against women and chil-
dren will continue. In recent years as young males from diverse class
backgrounds have committed horrendous acts of violence there has
been national condemnation of these acts but few attempts to link
this violence to sexist thinking.
I conclude the chapter on violence in Feminist Theory: From Mar-
gin to Center emphasizing that men are not the only people who ac-
cept, condone, and perpetuate violence, who create a culture of
violence. I urge women to take responsibility for the role women
play in condoning violence:
By only calling attention to male violence against women, or mak-
ing militarism just another expression of male violence, we fail to
adequately address the problem of violence and make it difficult
to develop viable resistance strategies and solutions .... While we
need not diminish the severity of the problem of male violence
against women or male violence against nations or the planet, we
must acknowledge that men and women have together made the
United States a culture of violence and must work together 
transform and recreate that culture. Women and men must op-
pose the use of violence as a means of social control in all its man-
ifestations: war, male violence against women, adult violence
against children, teenage violence, racial violence, etc. Feminist
efforts to end male violence against women must be expanded
into a movement to end all forms of violence.
And it is especially vital that parents learn to parent in nonviolent
ways. For our children will not turn away from violence if it is the
only way they know to handle difficult situations.
In our nation masses of people are concerned about violence
but resolutely refuse to link that violence to patriarchal thinking or
male domination. Feminist thinking offers a solution. And it is up to
us to make that solution available to everyone.
12
FEMINIST MASCULINITY
When contemporary feminist movement first began there was a
fierce anti-male faction. Individual heterosexual women came to the
movement from relationships where men were cruel, unkind, vio-
lent, unfaithful. Many of these men were radical thinkers who partic-
ipated in movements for social justice, speaking out on behalf of the
workers, the poor, speaking out on racial justice. But when it came
to the issue of gender they were as sexist as their conservative co-
horts. Individual women came from these relationships angry. And
they used that anger as a catalyst for women's liberation. As the
movement progressed, as feminist thinking advanced, enlightened
feminist activists saw that men were not the problem, that the prob-
lem was patriarchy, sexism, and male domination. It was difficult to
face the reality that the problem did not just lie with men. Facing
that reality required more complex theorizing; it required acknowl-
edging the role women play in maintaining and perpetuating sexism.
As more women moved away from destructive relationships with
men it was easier to see the whole picture. It became evident that
even if individual men divested of patriarchal privilege the system of
patriarchy, sexism, and male domination would still remain intact,
and women would still be exploited and/or oppressed.
Conservative mass media constantly represented feminist women

as man-haters. And when there was an anti-male faction or senti-
ment in the movement, they highlighted it as a way of discrediting
feminism. Embedded in the portrayal of feminists as man-hating
was the assumption that all feminists were lesbians. Appealing to
homophobia, mass media intensified anti-feminist sentiment
among men. Before contemporary feminist movement was le~s
than 10 years old, feminist thinkers began to talk about the way m
which patriarchy was harmful to men. Without changing ou~ fierce
critique of male domination feminist politics expand~d t~ mcl~de
the recognition that patriarchy stripped men of certam nghts, lm-
posing on them a sexist masculine identity.
Anti-feminist men have always had a strong public voice. The
men who feared and hated feminist thinking and feminist activists
were quick to marshal their collective forces and attack the move-
ment. But from the onset of the movement there was a small group
of men who recognized that feminist movement was as valid a
movement for social justice as all the other radical movements in
our nation's history that men had supported. These men became
our comrades in our struggle and our allies. Individual heterosexual
women active in the movement were often in intimate relationships
with the men who were struggling to come to terms with feminism.
Their conversion to feminist thinking was often a matter of rising to
meet the challenge or risking the termination of intimate bonds.
Anti-male factions within the feminist movement resented the
presence of anti-sexist men because their presence served to coun-
ter any insistence that all men are oppressors, or that all men hate
women. It promoted the interests of feminist women who were
seeking greater class mobility and access to forms of patriarc~al
power to polarize men and women by putting us in neat cate~ones
of oppressor/ oppressed. They portrayed all men as the enemy m or-
der to represent all women as victims. This focus on men deflected
FEMINIST MASCULINITY
69
attention from the class privilege of individual feminist activists as
well as their desire to increase their class power. Those individual ac-
tivists who called on all women to reject men refused to look at ei-
ther the caring bonds women shared with men or the economic and
emotional ties (however positive or negative) that bind women to
men who are sexist.
Feminists who called for a recognition of men as comrades in
struggle never received mass media attention. Our theoretical work
critiquing the demonization of men as the enemy did not change the
perspectives of women who were anti-male. And it was reaction to
negative representations of manhood that led to the development of
a men's movement that was anti-female. Writing about the "men's
liberation movement" I called attention to the opportunism under-
girding this movement:
These men identified themselves as victims of sexism, working to
liberate men. They identified rigid sex roles as the primary source
of their victimization, and, though they wanted to change the no-
tion of masculinity, they were not particularly concerned with
their sexist exploitation and oppression of women.
In many ways the men's movement mirrored the most negative as-
pects of the women's movement.
Even though anti-male factions within feminist movement
were small in number it has been difficult to change the image of
feminist women as man-hating in the public imagination. Of course
by characterizing feminism as being man-hating males could deflect
attention away from the accountability for male domination. If fem-
inist theory had offered more liberatory visions of masculinity it
would have been impossible for anyone to dismiss the movement as
anti-male. To a grave extent feminist movement failed to attract a
large body ot females and males because our theory did not effe
tively address the issue of not just what males might do to be anti-
sexist but also what an alternative masculinity might look like. Often
the only alternative to patriarchal masculinity presented by feminist
movement or the men's movement was a vision of men becoming
more "feminine." The idea of the feminine that was evoked emerged
from sexist thinking and did not represent an alternative to it.
What is and was needed is a vision of masculinity where self-
esteem and self-love of one's unique being forms the basis of identity.
Cultures of domination attack self-esteem, replacing it with a notion
that we derive our sense of being from dominion over another. Patri-
archal masculinity teaches men that their sense of self and identity,
their reason for being, resides in their capacity to dominate others.
To change this males must critique and challenge male domination of
the planet, of less powerful men, of women and children. But they
must also have a clear vision of what feminist masculinity looks like.
How can you become what you cannot imagine? And that vision has
yet to be made fully clear by feminist thinkers male or female.
As is often the case in revolutionary movements for social justice
we are better at naming the problem than we are at envisioning the
solution. We do know that patriarchal masculinity encourages men
to be pathologically narcissistic, infantile, and psychologically de-
pendent on the privileges (however relative) that they receive simply
for having been born male. Many men feel that their lives are being
threatened if these privileges are taken away, as they have structured
no meaningful core identity. That is why the men's movement posi-
tively attempted to teach men how to reconnect with their feelings, to
reclaim the lost boy within and nurture his soul, his spiritual growth.
No significant body of feminist literature has appeared that ad-
dresses boys, that lets them know how they can construct an identity
that is not rooted in sexism. Anti-sexist men have done little educa-
tion for critical consciousness which includes a focus on boyhood,
FEMINIST MASCULINITY
71
especially the development of adolescent males. As a consequence
of this gap, now that discussions about the raising of boys are receiv-
ing national attention, feminist perspectives are rarely if ever part of
the discussion. Tragically, we are witnessing a resurgence of harmful
misogynist assumptions that mothers cannot raise healthy sons, that
boys "benefit" from patriarchal militaristic notions of masculinity
which emphasize discipline and obedience to authority. Boys need
healthy self-esteem. They need love. And a wise and loving feminist
politics can provide the only foundation to save the lives of male
children. Patriarchy will not heal them. If that were so they would all
be well.
Most men in this nation feel troubled about the nature of their
identity. Even though they cling to patriarchy they are beginning to
intuit that it is part of the problem. Lack of jobs, the unrewarding
nature of paid labor, and the increased class power of women, has
made it difficult for men who are not rich and powerful to know
where they stand. White supremacist capitalist patriarchy is not able
to provide all it has promised. Many men are anguished because they
do not engage the liberating critiques that could enable them to face
that these promises were rooted in injustice and domination and
even when fulfilled have never led men to glory. Bashing liberation
while reinscribing the white supremacist capitalist patriarchal ways
of thinking that have murdered their souls in the first place, they are
just as lost as many boys.
A feminist vision which embraces feminist masculinity, which
loves boys and men and demands on their behalf every right that we
desire for girls and women, can renew the American male. Feminist
thinking teaches us all, especially, how to love justice and freedom in
ways that foster and affirm life. Clearly we need new strategies, new
theories, guides that will show us how to create a world where femi-
nist masculinity thrives.
13
FEMINIST PARENTING
Feminist focus on children was a central component of contempo-
rary radical feminist movement. By raising children without sexism
women hoped to create a future world where there would be no
need for an anti-sexist movement. Initially the focus on children pri-
marily highlighted sexist sex roles and the way in which they were
imposed on children from birth on. Feminist attention to children
almost always focused on girl children, on attacking sexist biases and
promoting alternative images. Now and then feminists would call
attention to the need to raise boys in an anti-sexist manner but for
the most part the critique of male patriarchy, the insistence that all
men had it better than all women, trickled down. The assumption
that boys always had more privilege and power than girls fueled fem-
inists prioritizing a focus on girls.
One of the primary difficulties feminist thinkers faced when
confronting sexism within families was that more often than not fe-
male parents were the transmitters of sexist thinking. Even in
households where no adult male parental caregiver was present,
women taught and teach children sexist thinking. Ironically, many
people assume that any female-headed household is automatically
matriarchal. In actuality women who head households in patriarchal
society often feel guilty about the absence of a male figure and are
72
FEMINIST PARENTING
73
hypervigilant about imparting sexist values to children, especially
males. In recent times mainstream conservative pundits have re-
sponded to a wellspring of violent acts by young males of all classes
and races by suggesting that single women cannot possible raise a
healthy male child. This is just simply not true. The facts show that
some of the most loving and powerful men in our society were
raised by single mothers. Again it must be reiterated that most peo-
ple assume that a woman raising children alone, especially sons, will
fail to teach a male child how to become a patriarchal male. This is
simply not the case.
Within white supremacist capitalist patriarchal cultures of dom-
ination children do not have rights. Feminist movement was the
first movement for social justice in this society to call attention to
the fact that ours is a culture that does not love children, that contin-
ues to see children as the property of parents to do with as they will.
Adult violence against children is a norm in our society. Problem-
atically, for the most part feminist thinkers have never wanted to call
attention to the reality that women are often the primary culprits in
everyday violence against children simply because they are the pri-
mary parental caregivers. While it was crucial and revolutionary that
feminist movement called attention to the fact that male domination
in the home often creates an autocracy where men sexually abuse
children, the fact is that masses of children are daily abused verbally
and physically by women and men. Maternal sadism often leads
women to emotionally abuse children, and feminist theory has not
yet offered both feminist critique and feminist intervention when
the issue is adult female violence against children.
In a culture of domination where children have no civil rights,
those who are powerful, adult males and females, can exert auto-
cratic rule of children. All the medical facts show that children are
violently abused daily in this society. Much of that abuse is lif
threatening. Many children die. Women perpetuate this violence as
much as men if not more. A serious gap in feminist thinking and
practice has been the refusal of the movement to confront head-on
adult female violence against children. Emphasizing male domina-
tion makes it easy for women, including feminist thinkers, to ignore
the ways women abuse children because we have all been socialized
to embrace patriarchal thinking, to embrace an ethics of domination
which says the powerful have the right to rule over the powerless
and can use any means to subordinate them. In the hierarchies of
white supremacist capitalist patriarchy, male domination of females
is condoned, but so is adult domination of children. And no one re-
ally wants to call attention to mothers who abuse.
Often I tell the story of being at a fancy dinner party where a
woman is describing the way she disciplines her young son by pinch-
ing him hard, clamping down on his little flesh for as long as it takes
to control him. And how everyone applauded her willingness to be a
disciplinarian. I shared the awareness that her behavior was abusive,
that she was potentially planting the seeds for this male child to grow
up and be abusive to women. Significantly, I told the audience of lis-
teners that if we had heard a man telling us how he just clamps down
on a woman's flesh, pinching her hard to control her behavior it
would have been immediately acknowledged as abusive. Yet when a
child is being hurt this form of negative domination is condoned.
This is not an isolated incident - much more severe violence
against children is enacted daily by mothers and fathers.
Indeed the crisis the children of this nation face is that patriar-
chal thinking clashing with feminist changes is making the family
even more of a war zone than it was when male domination was the
norm in every household. Feminist movement served as the catalyst,
uncovering and revealing the grave extent to which male sexual
abuse of children has been and is taking place in the patriarchal fam-
FEMINIST PARENTING
75
ily. It started with grown women in feminist movement receiving
therapeutic care acknowledging that they were abuse survivors and
bringing this acknowledgment out of the private realm of therapy
into public discourse. These revelations created the positive ethical
and moral context for children to confront abuse taking place in the
present. However, simply calling attention to male sexual abuse of
children has not created the climate where masses of people under-
stand that this abuse is linked to male domination, that it will end
only when patriarchy is eliminated. Male sexual abuse of children
happens more often and is reported more often than female abuse,
but female sexual coercion of children must be seen as just as horren-
dous as male abuse. And feminist movement must critique women
who abuse as harshly as we critique male abuse. Beyond the realm of
sexual abuse, violence against children takes many forms; the most
commonplace forms are acts of verbal and psychological abuse.
Abusive shaming lays the foundation for other forms of abuse.
Male children are often subjected to abuse when their behavior does
not conform to sexist notions of masculinity. They are often shamed
by sexist adults (particularly mothers) and other children. When
male parental caregivers embody anti-sexist thought and behavior
boys and girls have the opportunity to see feminism in action. When
feminist thinkers and activists provide children with educational
arenas where anti-sexist biases are not the standards used to judge
behavior, boys and girls are able to develop healthy self-esteem.
One of the most positive interventions feminist movement
made on behalf of children was to create greater cultural awareness
of the need for men to participate equally in parenting not just to
create gender equity but to build better relationships with children.
Future feminist studies will document all the ways anti-sexist male
parenting enhances the lives of children. Concurrently, we need to
know more about feminist parenting in general, about the practical

ways one can raise a child in an anti-sexist environment, and most
importantly we need to know more about what type of people the
children who are raised in these homes become.
Visionary feminist activists have never denied the importance
and value of male parental caregivers even as we continually work to
create greater cultural appreciation of motherhood and the work
done by women who mother. A disservice is done to all females
when praise for male participation in parenting leads to disparage-
ment and devaluation of the positive job of mothering women do.
At the beginning of feminist movement feminists were harsh critics
of mothering, pitting that task against careers which were deemed
more liberating, more self-affirming. However, as early as the
mid-'80s some feminist thinkers were challenging feminist devalua-
tion of motherhood and the overvaluation of work outside the
home. Writing on this subject in Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center
I made the point that:
Working within a social context where sexism is still the norm,
where there is unnecessary competition promoting envy, distrust,
antagonism, and malice between individuals, makes work stress-
ful, frustrating, and often totally unsatisfying ... many women
who like and enjoy the wage work they do feel that it takes too
much of their time, leaving little space for other satisfying pur-
suits. While work may help women gain a degree of financial in-
dependence or even financial self-sufficiency, for most women it
has not adequately fulfilled human needs. As a consequence
women's search for fulfilling labor done in an environment of
care has led
to
reemphasizing the importance of family and the
positive aspects of motherhood.
Ironically just when feminist thinkers had worked to create a more
balanced portrait of mothering patriarchal mainstream culture
launched a vicious critique of single-parent, female-headed house-
FEMINIST PARENTING
77
holds. That critique was most harsh when it came to the question of
welfare. Ignoring all the data which shows how skillfully loving sin-
gle mothers parent with very little income whether they receive state
assistance or work for a wage, patriarchal critiques call attention to
dysfunctional female-headed households, act as though these are
the norm, then suggest the problem can be solved if men were in the
picture as patriarchal providers and heads of households.
No anti-feminist backlash has been as detrimental to the
well-being of children as societal disparagement of single mothers.
In a culture which holds the two-parent patriarchal family in higher
esteem than any other arrangement, all children feel emotionally in-
secure when their family does not measure up to the standard. A
utopian vision of the patriarchal family remains intact despite all the
evidence which proves that the well-being of children is no more se-
cure in the dysfunctional male-headed household than in the dys-
functional female-headed household. Children need to be raised in
loving environments. Whenever domination is present love is lack-
ing. Loving parents, be they single or coupled, gay or straight,
headed by females or males, are more likely to raise healthy, happy
children with sound self-esteem. In future feminist movement we
need to work harder to show parents the ways ending sexism posi-
tively changes family life. Feminist movement is pro-family. Ending
patriarchal domination of children, by men or women, is the only
way to make the family a place where children can be safe, where
they can be free, where they can know love.
14
LIBERATING MARRIAGE AND
PARTNERSHIP
When contemporary feminist movement was at its peak the institu-
tion of marriage was harshly critiqued. The entrance of many het-
erosexual women into the movement had been sparked by male
domination in intimate relationships, particularly long-time mar-
riages where gender inequity was the norm. From the onset the
movement challenged the double standard in relationship to sexual-
ity which condemned females who were not virgins or faithfullov-
ers and spouses while allowing men the space to do whatever they
desired sexually and have their behavior condoned. The sexualliber-
ation movement strengthened feminist critique of marriage, espe-
cially the demand for safe, affordable birth controL
Early on feminist activists focused so much attention on private
bonds and domestic relationships because it was in those circum-
stances that women of all classes and races felt the brunt of male
domination, whether from patriarchal parents or spouses. A woman
might assertively challenge a sexist male boss or stranger's attempt
to dominate her, then go home and submit to her partner. Contem-
porary feminists, both those heterosexual women who had come
from long-time marriages and lesbian allies in struggle, critiqued
78
LIBERATING MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP
79
marriage as yet another form of sexual slavery. They highlighted the
way traditionally sexist bonds led to marriages where elements of in-
timacy, care, and respect were sacrificed so that men could be on
top - could be patriarchs ruling the roost.
Early on many feminist women were pessimistic about men
changing. Some heterosexual women decided that they would
choose celibacy or lesbianism over seeking after unequal relationships
with sexist men. Others saw sexual monogamy with men as rein-
forcing the idea that the female body was property belonging to the
individual male she was bonded with. We chose non-monogamous
relationships and often refused to marry. We believed living with a
male partner without state-sanctioned marriage within patriarchal
society helped men maintain a healthy respect for female autonomy.
Feminists advocated demanding an end to sexual slavery and called
attention to the prevalence of marital rape while at the same time
championing the rights of women to express sexual desire, initiate
sexual interaction, and be sexually fulfilled.
There were many heterosexual men who embraced feminist
thinking precisely because they were unfulfilled sexually in relation-
ships with partners who were not interested in sex because they had
been taught virtuous women were not sexually active. These men
were grateful to feminist movement for offering a liberatory sexual
paradigm for female mates because it ensured that they would have
a more fulfilling sex life. By challenging the notion that a woman's
virtue was determined by her sexual practice feminist thinkers not
only took away the stigma attached to not being a virgin; they placed
female sexual well-being on a equal par with that of men. Urging
women to no longer pretend that they were sexually fulfilled when
this was not the case, feminist movement threatened to expose male
sexual shortcoming
To defuse this threat sexist men continually insisted that most
feminists were lesbians or that all any feminist woman needed was
"a good fuck" to put her back in her place. In actuality feminist re-
bellion exposed the fact that many women were not having satisfy-
ing sex with men in patriarchal relationships. In relationship to
intimate bonds most men were more willing to embrace feminist
changes in female sexuality which led women to be more sexually
active than those changes which demanded of men a change in their
sexual behavior. The absence of sexual foreplay was a much dis-
cussed issue when feminist agendas first focused on heterosexuality.
Straight women were tired of male sexual coercion and lack of con-
cern with female pleasure. Feminist focus on sexual pleasure gave
women the language to critique and challenge male sexual behavior.
When it came to sexual freedom women made great strides. The
critique of monogamy has been forgotten as the prevalence of sexu-
ally transmitted diseases has made it more difficult for females to
choose sexual promiscuity. The prevalence of life-threatening dis-
eases like AIDS, which tend to be more easily transmitted male to
female, in a patriarchal culture where men are encouraged to lie to
women, have made it harder for heterosexual women to choose a
variety of partners. Clearly, when the emphasis is on monogamy in
heterosexual bonds within patriarchy it is often harder for couples
to break with sexist paradigms. Concurrently within patriarchy
many individual feminist women found that non-monogamous rela-
tionships often simply gave men more power while undermining
women. While women will freely choose to have sex with a man
who is partnered with another woman, men will often show no sex-
ual interest in a woman who is partnered. Or they will continually
concede power to the male the woman is partnered with, even going
so far as to seek his approval of their involvement. Despite these dif-
ficulties, women having the freedom to be non-monogamous,
LIBERATING MARRIAGE AND PAR1NERSHIP
81
whether we exercise that freedom or not, continues to disrupt and
challenge the notion that the female body belongs to men. Like all
the positive changes produced by feminist critique of sexist notions
of sexual pleasure it has helped create a world where women and
men can have more satisfying sexual relationships.
At first it appeared that changes in the nature of sexual bonds
would lead to other changes in domestic relationships, that men
would also do an equal share of household chores and child care.
Nowadays so many males acknowledge that they should do house-
hold chores, whether they actually do them or not, that young
women see no need to make sharing chores an issue; they just accept
this as a norm. Of course the reality is that it has never become the
norm, that for the most part women still do most of the housework
and child care. Overall men were more willing to accept and affirm
equality in the bedroom than to accept equality around housework
and child care. Not surprisingly, as individual women gained in class
power many women deal with inequity by hiring caretakers to do the
tasks neither they nor male partners want to perform. Yet when a
heterosexual couple pays help to do the tasks sexist thinking defines
as "female" it is usually the woman who employs the help and over-
sees this work.
More than any factor the feminist critique of mothering as the
sole satisfying purpose of a woman's life changed the nature of mar-
riage and long-time partnerships. Once a woman's worth was no
longer determined by whether or not she birthed and raised children
it was possible for a two-career couple who wanted to remain child-
less to envision a peer marriage - a relationship between equals.
The absence of children made it easier to be peers simply because
the way in which patriarchal society automatically assumes certain
tasks will be done by mothers almost always makes it harder for
women to achieve gender equity around child care. For example: it 
very telling that in the wake of femirust movement the patriarchal
medical establishment which had previously downplayed breast-
feeding suddenly began to be not only positive about breast-feeding, .
but insistent. This is just one aspect of child-rearing that automati-
cally places more responsibility on the birthing female whether she
is heterosexual or lesbian. Certainly many women in relationships
with males often found that having a newborn baby plummeted
their relationships back into more sexist-defined roles. However
when couples work hard to maintain equity in all spheres, especially
child care, it can be the reality; the key issue, though, is working hard.
And most men have not chosen to work hard at child care.
Positively femirust interventions called attention to the value
and importance of male parenting both in regards to the well-being
of children and gender equity. When males participate equally in
parenting, relationships between women and men are better,
whether the two parents are married or live together or separately.
Because of feminist movement more men do more parenting than
ever before, yet we have not achieved even a semblance of gender
equity. And we know that this equal participation makes parenting a
more positive and fulfilling experience for all parties involved. Of
course the demands of work often create the obstacles to more par-
ticipation in child care by working parents, especially men. Until we
see major changes in the way work is structured timewise, we will
not live in a world where life is designed to allow men the time and
space to parent. In that world men might be more eager to parent.
But until then, many working males who are overtired and under-
paid will all too willingly accept a woman doing all the child care,
even if she is overtired and underpaid. The world of work within
white supremacist capitalist patriarchy has made it harder for
women to parent fully. Indeed, this reality is leading women who
might choose a career to stay home. Rather than sexist thinking
LIBERATING MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP
83
about male domination becoming the factor which takes women
out of the workforce and puts them back in the home, it is the fear
that we are raising a society of "parentless" children. Many women
find competitive careerism leaves little time for nurturing loving re-
lationships. The fact that no one talks about men leaving work to be
full-time parents shows the extent to which sexist thinking about
roles prevails. Most people in our society still believe women are
better at raising children than men.
To a grave extent women, who on one hand critiqued mother-
hood but on the other hand also enjoyed the special status and privi-
leges it gave them, especially when it came to parent-child bonding,
were not as willing to relinquish pride of place in parenting to men as
feminist thinkers hoped. Individual femirust thinkers who critiqued
biological determirusm in every other area often embraced it when it
came to the issue of mothering. They were not able to fully embrace
the notion that fathers are just as important as mothers, and can par-
ent just as well. These contradictions, along with the predominance
of sexist thinking, have undermined the femirust demand for gender
equity when it comes to child care.
Nowadays mass media continually bombards us with the mes-
sage that marriage has made a comeback. Marriage never went out
of fashion. Often when people proclaim that it is making a comeback,
what they really mean is that more sexist-defined notions of marriage
are "in" again. This fact is troubling to femirust movement because it
is just as clear today as it was yesterday that marriages built on a sexist
foundation are likely to be deeply troubled and rarely last. Traditionally
sexist marriages are more and more in vogue. And while they tend to
breed the seeds of misery and dissatisfaction that served as a catalyst
for feminist rebellion in domestic relationships, the factor that
breaks with tradition is that these bonds are often severed quickly.
Folks marry young and divorce youn
Patriarchal male domination in marriage and partnerships has
been the primary force creating breakups and divorces in our soci-
ety. All recent studies of successful marriages show that gender eq-
uity creates a context where each member of the couple is likely to
be affirmed. This affirmation creates greater happiness, and, even if
the marriage does not last forever, the peer friendship that has been
the foundation of the bond continues. Significantly, in future femi-
nist movement we will spend less time critiquing patriarchal mar-
riage bonds and expend more effort showing alternatives, showing
the value of peer relationships which are founded on principles of
equality, respect, and the belief that mutual satisfaction and growth
are needed for partnerships to be fulfilling and lasting.
15
A FEMINIST SEXUAL POLITIC
An Ethics of Mutual Freedom
Before feminist movement, before sexual liberation, most women
found it difficult, if not downright impossible, to assert healthy sex-
ual agency. Sexist thinking taught to females from birth on had
made it clear that the domain of sexual desire and sexual pleasure
was always and only male, that only a female of little or no virtue
would lay claim to sexual need or sexual hunger. Divided by sexist
thinking into the roles of madonnas or whores females had no basis
on which to construct a healthy sexual self. Luckily feminist move-
ment immediately challenged sexist sexual stereotypes. It helped
that this challenge came at a time in our nation's history where de-
pendable birth control was made accessible to all.
Before dependable birth control female sexual self-assertion
could lead always to the "punishment" of unwanted pregnancy and
the dangers of illegal abortion. We have not amassed enough testi-
mony to let the world know the sexual pathologies and horrors
women endured prior to the existence of dependable birth control.
It evokes fear within me just to imagine a world where every time a
female is sexual she risks being impregnated, to imagine a world
where men want sex and women fear it. In such world a desiring
woman might find the intersection of her desire and her fear. We
have not amassed enough testimony telling us what women did to

ward off male sexual advances, how they coped with ongoing mari-
tal rape, how they coped with risking death to deal with unwanted
pregnancies. We do know that the world of female sexuality was for-
ever changed by the coming of feminist sexual revolution.
For those of us who had witnessed the sexual pain and bitter-
ness of our mothers, their out-and-out fear and hatred of sexuality,
coming into a movement, just as we were becoming more sexual,
that promised us freedom, pleasure, and delight was awesome.
Nowadays females face so few obstacles inhibiting their expression
of sexual desire that our culture risks burying the historical memory
of patriarchal assault on women's bodies and sexuality. In that place
of forgetfulness efforts to make abortion illegal can focus on the is-
sue of whether or not a life is being taken without ever bringing into
the discussion the devastating effects ending legal abortion would
have on female sexuality. We still live among generations of women
who have never known sexual pleasure, women for whom sex has
only ever meant loss, threat, danger, annihilation.
Female sexual freedom requires dependable, safe birth control.
Without it females cannot exercise full control of the outcome of
sexual activity. But female sexual freedom also requires knowledge
of one's body, an understanding of the meaning of sexual integrity.
Early feminist activism around sexuality focused so much attention
on just the politics of granting females the right to be sexual when-
ever we wanted to be, with whomever we wanted to be sexual with,
that there was little feminist education for critical consciousness
teaching us how to respect our bodies in an anti-sexist way, teaching
us what liberatory sex might look like.
In the late '60s and early '70s females were often encouraged to
make synonymous sexual freedom and sexual promiscuity. In those
days and to some extent in the present most heterosexual men saw
and see a sexually liberated female as the one who would be or will
A FEMINIST SEXUAL POLITIC
87
be sexual with the least amount of fuss, i.e., asserting no demands,
particularly emotional ones. And a large number of heterosexual
feminists had the same misguided notions because they were pat-
terning their behavior on the model provided by patriarchal males.
However it did not take women long to realize that sexual promiscu-
ity and sexual liberation were not one and the same.
When feminist movement was "hot" radical lesbian activists
constantly demanded that straight women reconsider their bonds
with men, raising the question of whether or not it was possible for
women to ever have a liberated heterosexual experience within a pa-
triarchal context. This interrogation was useful for the movement. It
not only forced straight women to engage in ongoing critical vigi-
lance about heterosexual practice, it highlighted lesbians in ways that
positively expos'ed their strength while also revealing weaknesses.
Individual women who moved from having relationships with men
to choosing women because they were seduced by the popular slo-
gan "feminism is the theory, lesbianism the practice" soon found
that these relationships were as emotionally demanding and as
fraught with difficulties as any other.
The degree to which lesbian partnership was as good as or
better than heterosexual bonds was usually determined not by both
parties being of the same sex but by the extent of their commitment
to breaking with notions of romance and partnership informed by a
culture of domination's sadomasochistic assumption that in every
relationship there is a dominant and a submissive party. Sexual pro-
miscuity among lesbians could no more be equated with sexual lib-
eration than it could be in heterosexual practice. Irrespective of their
sexual preference women who suffered emotionally by equating the
two were disillusioned about sex. And given the connection be-
tween male domination and sexual violence it is not surprising th
women who had been involved with men were often the most vocal
about their sexual unhappiness.
The consequence of this disillusionment with the dream of sex-
ual freedom was that many individual feminist thinkers either came
away from coping with these experiences, and/ or the negative fall-
out a female friend or comrade faced, harboring repressed resent-
ment about all sexual activity, especially sexual contact with men.
Radical lesbians who had once been the lone voices calling women
to account for "sleeping with the enemy" were now joined by het-
erosexual women who were choosing same-sex bonds because they
were utterly disillusioned with men. Suddenly the discourse on sexu-
ality, particularly all discussion of intercourse, that emerged made it
seem that all coitus was sexual coercion, that any penetration of the
female by the male was rape. For a time these theories and the indi-
vidual charismatic women who spread the news had a deep impact
on the consciousness of young women who were struggling to es-
tablish new and different sexual identities. Many of these young
women ended up choosing bisexual practice or choosing relation-
ships with men where it was agreed that the female partner would
determine the nature of all sexual encounter. However masses of
young females simply turned away from feminist thinking. And in
this turning found their way back to outmoded sexist notions of sex-
ual freedom and embraced them, at times with a vengeance.
No wonder then that the contradictions and conflicts arising as
a consequence of the tensions between sexual pleasure and danger,
sexual freedom and bondage, provided the seductive proving
ground for sexual sadomasochism. Ultimately feminist interroga-
tions of sexuality were all tied to a question of power. No matter
how much feminist thinkers talked about equality, when it came to
sexual desire and the enactment of sexual passion the dynamics of
power and powerlessness evoked in the sexual arena disrupted sim-
A FEMINIST SEXUAL POLITIC
89
plistic notions of oppressor and oppressed. Nothing challenged the
grounds of feminist critique of heterosexual practice more than the
revelation that feminist lesbians engaged in sexual sadomasochism,
a world of tops and bottoms, wherein positions of powerful and
powerless were deemed acceptable.
Practically all radical feminist discussion of sexuality ceased
when women within the movement began to fight over the issue of
whether or not one could be a liberated woman, whether lesbian or
heterosexual, and engage in the practice of sexual sadomasochism.
Tied to this issue were differences of opinion about the meaning and
significance of patriarchal pornography. Faced with issues powerful
enough to divide and disrupt the movement, by the late '80s most
radical feminist dialogues about sexuality were no longer public;
they took place privately. Talking about sexuality publicly had
devastated the movement.
Publicly the feminist women who continued to talk the most
about sexuality tended to be conservative, at times puritanical and
anti-sex. The movement had been radically changed, moving from
being a site where female sexual liberation had been called for and
celebrated to a site where public discussions of sexuality focused
more on sexual violence and victimization. Mainstream aging femi-
nist individual women who had once been the great champions of
female sexual freedom for the most part began to talk about sexual
pleasure as unimportant, valorizing celibacy. Increasingly women
who speak and write openly about sexual desire and practice tend to
dismiss or distance themselves from feminist sexual politics. And
more than ever the feminist movement is seen primarily as anti-sex.
Visionary feminist discourse on sexual passion and pleasure has
been pushed into the background, ignored by almost everyone. In
its place females and males continue to rely on patriarchal models of
sexual freedo
Despite sexual revolution and feminist movement we know
that many heterosexual females have sex only because males want
them to, that young homosexuals, male and female, still have no
public or private supportive environment that affirms their sexual
preference, that the sexist iconography of madonna or whore con-
tinues to claim the erotic imagination of males and females, that pa-
triarchal pornography now permeates every aspect of mass media,
that unwanted pregnancy is on the increase, that teens are having of-
ten unsatisfying and unsafe sex, that in many long-time marriages
and partnerships, whether same-sex or heterosexual, women are
having no sex. All these facts call attention to the need for renewed
feminist dialogue about sexuality. We still need to know what
liberatory sexual practice looks like.
Fundamentally mutual respect is essential to liberatory sexual
practice and the conviction that sexual pleasure and fulfilment is
best attained in a circumstance of choice and consensual agreement.
Within patriarchal society men and women cannot know sustained
heterosexual bliss unless both parties have divested of their sexist
thinking. Many women and men still consider male sexual perfor-
mance to be determined solely by whether or not the penis is hard
and erections are maintained. This notion of male performance is
tied to sexist thinking. While men must let go of the sexist assump-
tion that female sexuality exists to serve and satisfy their needs,
many women must also let go a fixation on penetration.
During the heyday of sexual liberation and contemporary femi-
nist movement women found that men were often willing to accept
equality in every sphere except sexuality. In the bedroom many men
want a sexually desiring woman eager to give and share pleasure but
ultimately they did not surrender the sexist assumption that her sex-
ual performance (i.e., whether or not she wanted to be sexual)
should be determined by their desire. While it was fun to do it with
A FEMINIST SEXUAL POLITIC
91
willing excited, liberated females it was not fun when those females
declared that they wanted a space not to be sexual. Often when that
happened heterosexual men made it clear that they would need to
took elsewhere for sexual release, an action which reinforced the re-
ality of continued allegiance to a sexist paradigm of ownership in the
female body as well as their holding to the notion that any female
body would suffice. In a liberatory heterosexual or homosexual rela-
tionships both parties should be free to determine when and how
frequently they want to be sexual without fear of punishment. Until
all men cease to believe that someone other than themselves is re-
quired to respond to their sexual needs demanding sexual subordi-
nation of partners will continue.
A truly liberatory feminist sexual politic will always make the as-
sertion of female sexual agency central. That agency cannot come
into being when females believe their sexual bodies must always
stand in the service of something else. Often professional prosti-
tutes and women in everyday life hold up their free exchange of
pussy for goods or services as an indication that they are liberated.
They refuse to acknowledge the fact that whenever a woman prosti-
tutes her body because she cannot satisfy material needs in other
ways she risks forfeiting that space of sexual integrity where she con-
trols her body.
Masses of heterosexual women remain unable to let go the sex-
ist assumption that their sexuality must always be sought after by
men to have meaning and value. To do so they must believe that
same-sex sexual encounters, self-pleasuring, and celibacy are as vital
and life-enhancing as sexual intercourse with men within patriarchal
culture. Aging females, many of whom once advocated feminist
change, often find that they must subscribe to sexist notions of fem-
ininity and sexual desirability in order to have any sexual contact
with men whom they fear will trade them in for a younger model. 
some extent then radical feminist thinkers were right years ago when
they suggested that women would only be truly sexually liberated
when we arrived at a place where we could see ourselves as having
sexual value and agency irrespective of whether or not we were the
objects of male desire. Again we need feminist theory to show us
how this sexual feeling and identity expresses itself within the con-
text of a society that remains deeply patriarchal.
Despite the limitations of feminist discourse on sexuality, femi-
nist politics still is the only movement for social justice that offers a
vision of mutual well-being as a consequence of its theory and prac-
tice. We need an erotics of being that is founded on the principle
that we have a right to express sexual desire as the spirit moves us
and to find in sexual pleasure a life-affirming ethos. Erotic connec-
tion calls us away from isolation and alienation into community. In a
world where positive expressions of sexual longing connect us we
will all be free to choose those sexual practices which affirm and
nurture our growth. Those practices may range from choosing pro-
miscuity or celibacy, from embracing one specific sexual identity
and preference or choosing a roaming uncharted desire that is kin-
dled only by interaction and engagement with specific individuals
with whom we feel the spark of erotic recognition no matter their
sex, race, class, or even their sexual preference. Radical feminist dia-
logues about sexuality must surface so that the movement towards
sexual freedom can begin again.
16

Lesbianism and Feminism
Sometimes it's hard to know which came first, the movement for
women's liberation or sexual liberation - for some activists they
happened at the same time, blending into one another. This was cer-
tainly true for many of the bisexual and lesbian women who were
part of the first contemporary feminist vanguard. These women
were notled to feminism because they were lesbian. Masses oflesbi-
ans were not "into" politics, were conservative, and had no desire to
do anything radical. The lesbians and bisexual women who helped
form the women's liberation vanguard were led to feminism be-
cause they were already engaged in left politics, pushing against fixed
boundaries of class, race, and sexuality. Women's liberation had al-
ready been an issue they had claimed psychologically, rebelling
against traditional notions of gender and desire.
Simply being lesbian does not make one a feminist, anymore
than being lesbian makes one political. Being a member of an ex-
ploited group does not make anyone more inclined to resist. If it did,
all women (and that includes every lesbian on the planet) would
have wanted to participate in the women's movement. Experience
coupled with awareness and choice are the factors that usually lead
women into leftist politics. Having done so much of the menial tasks
as well as the behind the scenes radical thinking in socialist circles

and in the civil rights and militant black power movements, individ-
ual radical women from various walks of life were ready to get jus-
tice for themselves; they were ready for feminist movement. And
among the most ready, the truly visionary and courageous, were and
are many lesbian women.
I came to feminism before I had my first sexual experience. I
was a teenager. Before I knew anything about women's rights I
knew about homosexuality. In the narrowminded world of southern
religious fundamentalism, of racial apartheid, in our black commu-
nity gay people were known and often had special status; often they
were men with class power. Homosexuality among men was more
accepted than lesbianism. The lesbians in our small, segregated
black community were usually married. Yet they knew who they re-
ally were. And they let their real selves be known behind closed
doors, at secret jook joints and parties. One of the women accused
of being lesbian chose to mentor me; a professional woman, a
reader, a thinker, a party girl, she was a woman I admired. When my
father complained about our bonding on the basis that she was
"funny," mama protested, insisting that "folks had a right to be who
they are." When the gay man who lived across the street from us was
cruelly teased and taunted by teenage boys, mama was there protest-
ing, telling us that he was a responsible caring man - that we should
respect and love him.
I was an advocate for gay rights long before I knew the word
feminism. My family feared I was a lesbian long before they worried
that I would never marry. And I was already on my way to being a
true freak because I knew I would always choose to go where my
blood beats, in any and all directions. When I wrote my first book,
Ain't I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism, I had already been en-
gaged in feminist movement which included straight, bisexual, and
out gay women. We were young. And in those days there was pres-

95
sure on some of us to prove we were really radically down with the
movement by sharing our politics and our bodies with women. The
lesson everybody learned in those days was that transgressive sexual
practice did not make one politically progressive. When my first
book came out and I was attacked by individual black lesbian
women I was stunned. I was accused of being homophobic because
there was no discussion oflesbianism in my book. That absence was
not an indication of homophobia. I did not talk about sexuality in
the book. I was not ready. I did not know enough. And had I known
more I would have stated that so no one would have been able to la-
bel me homophobic.
What knowing powerful, caring lesbians taught me as a girl, a
lesson that has continued, is that women do not need to depend on
men for our well-being and our happiness - not even our sexual
bliss. This knowledge opened up a world of possibility for women.
It offered choice and options. We will never know how many mil-
lions of women stay in relationships with dominating sexist males
simply because they cannot imagine a life where they can be happy
without men, whether they are satisfied sexually and emotionally
with the men in their life or not. If any female feels she needs any-
thing beyond herself to legitimate and validate her existence, she is
already giving away her power to be self-defining, her agency. Les-
bian women inspired me from childhood on to claim the space of
my own self-definition.
This is the special wisdom radical lesbian thinkers brought to
feminist movement. Even if there were exceptional straight women
who theoretically understood that one could be utterly fulfilled
without the approval of men, without male erotic affirmation, they
did not bring to the movement the lived experience of this belief. In
the early stages of feminist movement we used the phrase "woman-
identified woman" or "man-identified woman" to distinguish b
tween those activists who did not choose lesbianism but who did
choose to be woman-identified, meaning their ontological existence
did not depend on male affirmation. Male-identified females were
those who dropped feminist principles in a flash if they interfered
with romantic heterosexual concerns. They were the females who
also supported men more than women, who could always see things
from the male perspective. Teaching one of my first women's stud-
ies courses in San Francisco I was confronted by a group of radical
lesbian students who wanted to know why I was still "into" men.
After class one day in the parking lot there was a showdown. At that
time an older black woman lesbian student, who had worked in the
sex industry, having much sexual intercourse with men even as she
remained clear about her lesbian identity, defended my feminist
honor by declaring, "she's a woman-identified woman who's into
sex with men -
that's her right, but she's still down with the cause."
Sustaining loyalty to feminist politics was a central topic of dis-
cussion within feminist circles by the mid-'80s as many women were
dropping out. While visionary lesbian thinkers and/ or activists had
shaped the radical dimensions of the movement as women gained
more rights, their presence, their input was often forgotten. Many of
the lesbians who were most radical and courageous in the move-
ment were from working-class backgrounds. Then they did not have
the credentials needed to rise in academic circles. The academization
of feminism reinscribed heterosexist hierarchies where straight
women with fancy credentials were often given more respect and
higher regard even if they had spent no time being involved in a
women's movement outside the academy.
When it came to issues of difference, of expanding feminist the-
ory and practice to include race and class, visionary lesbian thinkers
were among those women most willing to change their perspectives.
In many cases it was because they had an experiential understanding

97
of what it means to be exploited and/or oppressed because you do
not conform to mainstream standards. Visionary lesbians were far
more willing to take on the issue of interrogating white supremacy
than their straight comrades. And they were more likely to desire to
strengthen bonds with all men. The vast majority of straight women,
whether they were actively feminist or not, were more concerned
about their relationships with men.
Our freedom as women to choose who we love, who we will
share our bodies and lives with, has been deeply enhanced by the
struggles of radical lesbian women both on behalf of gay rights and
women's rights. Within feminist movement, both past and pres-
ent-day, lesbians have always had to challenge and confront homo-
phobia, much in the same way as all women of color irrespective of
their sexual preference or identity challenged and confronted rac-
ism. Women who claim to be feminist while perpetuating homo-
phobia are as misguided and hypocritical as those who want
sisterhood while holding on to white supremacist thought.
Mainstream mass media has always chosen a straight woman to
represent what the feminist movement stands for - the straighter
the better. The more glamorous she is, the more her image can be
used to appeal to men. Woman-identified women, whether straight,
bisexual, or lesbian rarely make garnering male approval a priority in
our lives. This is why we threaten the patriarchy. Lesbian women
who have a patriarchal mindset are far less threatening to men than
feminist women, gay or straight, who have turned their gaze and
their desire away from the patriarchy, away from sexist men.
Nowadays the vast majority oflesbians, like their straight coun-
terparts, are not into radical politics. Individual lesbian thinkers ac-
tive in feminist movement often found it difficult to face the reality
that lesbian women could be as sexist as straight women. The uto-
pian notion that feminism would be the theory and lesbianism t
practice was continually disrupted by the reality that most lesbians
living in white supremacist capitalist patriarchal culture constructed
partnerships using the same paradigms of domination and submis-
sion as did their heterosexual counterparts. And that building mutu-
ally satisfying bonds where no one risked being subordinated was as
difficult to achieve in lesbian relationships as in heterosexual ones.
The revelation that domestic violence happened in lesbian partner-
ships was the first clue that equality among women was not inherent
in same sex bonds. Concurrently, feminist lesbians were far more
willing to talk openly about their participation in sadomasochist sex-
ual acts than their straight counterparts.
Sexually conservative feminists, gay and straight, found and
continue to find consensual sexual rituals of domination and sub-
mission inappropriate and see them as betraying feminist ideals of
freedom. Their absolute judgment, their refusal to respect the rights
of all women to choose the sexual practice they find most fulfilling,
is in actuality the stance which most undermines feminist movement.
There are many women who will never understand what two women
do together sexually, who will never desire another woman sexually,
but who will always support the right of women to choose, to be les-
bian or bisexual. That same support can be given lesbians and
straight women who engage in sexual acts that would never appeal
to most women or most people. Embedded in conservative feminist
critique of lesbian sadomasochism was an underlying homophobia.
Whenever any woman acts as though lesbians must always follow
rigid moral standards to be deemed acceptable or to make straight
people feel comfortable, they are perpetuating homophobia. Cer-
tainly as more straight women openly discussed their involvement
with sexual sadomasochism, feminist critique was not as harsh and
unrelenting as it was when it was seen as mostly a lesbian thing.
Challenging homophobia will always be a dimension of feminist

movement. For there can be no sustained sisterhood between
women when there is ongoing disrespect and subordination of les-
bian females by straight women. In visionary feminist movement
the work of activists who are lesbians is fully acknowledged. With-
out radical lesbian input feminist theory and practice would never
have dared to push against the boundaries ofheterosexism to create
spaces where women, all women, irrespective of their sexual identity
and/ or preference, could and can be as free as they want to be. This
legacy should be continually acknowledged and cherished.
If women and men want to know love, we have to yearn for femi-
nism. For without feminist thinking and practice we lack the foun-
dation to create loving bonds. Early on, profound disappointment
with heterosexual relationships led many individual females to
women's liberation. Many of these women felt betrayed by the
promise oflove and living happily ever after when they entered mar-
riages with men who swiftly transformed themselves from charming
princes into patriarchal lords of the manor. These heterosexual
women brought to the movement their bitterness and their rage.
They joined their heartache with that of lesbian women who had
also felt betrayed in romantic bonds based on patriarchal values. As
a consequence when it came to the issue oflove the feminist take on
the matter at the start of the movement was that female freedom
could only happen if women let go their attachment to romantic love.
Our yearning for love, we were told in our consciousness-raising
groups, was the seductive trap that kept us falling in love with patri-
archallovers, male or female, who used that love to subdue and sub-
ordinate us. Joining feminist movement before I had even had my
first sexual experience with a man, I was stunned by the intense ha-
tred and anger towards men that women expressed. Yet I under-
stood the basis of the anger. My own conversion to feminist

thinking in my teenage years was in direct response to my father's
domination of everyone in our household. A military man, an ath-
lete, a deacon of the church, a provider, a womanizer, he was the
embodiment of patriarchal rule. I witnessed my mother's pain, and I
rebelled. Mama never expressed anger or rage at gender injustice, no
matter how extreme dad's humiliation of her or his violence.
When I went to my first consciousness-raising groups and
heard women my mother's age give voice to pain, grief, and rage,
their insistence that worn-en had to move away from love made
sense to me. But I still wanted the love of a good man, and I still be-
lieved I could find that love. However, I was absolutely certain that
first the man had to be committed to feminist politics. In the early
'70s, women who wanted to be with men faced the challenge of con-
verting men to feminist thinking. If they were not feminist we knew
there would be no lasting happiness.
Romantic love as most people understand it in patriarchal cul-
ture makes one unaware, renders one powerless and out of control.
Feminist thinkers called attention to the way this notion of love
served the interests of patriarchal men and women. It supported the
notion that one could do anything in the name oflove: beat people,
restrict their movements, even kill them and call it a "crime of pas-
sion," plead, "I loved her so much I had to kill her." Love in patriar-
chal culture was linked to notions of possession, to paradigms of
domination and submission wherein it was assumed one person
would give love and another person receive it. Within patriarchy
heterosexist bonds were formed on the basis that women being the
gender in touch with caring emotions would give men love, and in
return men, being in touch with power and aggression, would pro-
vide and protect. Yet in so many cases in heterosexual families men
did not respond to care: instead they were tyrants who used their
power unjustly to coerce and control. From the start heterosexual

women came to women's liberation to stop the heartache -
to
break the bonds of love.
Significantly, they also stressed back then the importance of not
living for one's children. This too was presented as another trap love
set to prevent women from achieving full self-actualization. The
mother, feminism warned us back then, who tried to vicariously live
through her children, was a dominating, invasive monster capable of
meting ()ut cruel and unjust punishment. Those who came to femi-
nist politics young were often rebelling against domineering moth-
ers. We did not want to become them. We wanted our lives to be as
different from their lives as we could make them. One way to ensure
that we would be different would be simply to remain childless.
Early on the feminist critique of love was not complex enough.
Rather than specifically challenging patriarchal misguided assump-
tions of love, it just presented love as the problem. We were to do
away with love and put in its place a concern with gaining rights and
power. Then, no one talked about the reality that women would risk
hardening our hearts and end up being just as emotionally closed as
the patriarchal men or butch females we were rejecting in the name
of feminist rebellion. And for the most part this is exactly what hap-
pened. Rather than rethinking love and insisting on its importance
and value, feminist discourse on love simply stopped. Women who
wanted love, especially love with men, had to took elsewhere for an
understanding of how they might find love. Many of those women
turned away from feminist politics because they felt it denied the im-
portance of love, of familial relations, of life lived in community
with others.
Visionary feminist thinkers were also uncertain about what to
say to women about love. In Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center I
wrote about the need for feminist leaders to bring a spirit of love to
feminist activism: "They should have the ability to show love and
TO LOVE AGAIN
103
compassion, show this love through their actions, and be able to en-
gage in successful dialogue." While I shared my belief that "love acts
to transform domination" at that time I did not write in depth about
the importance of creating feminist theory that would offer every-
one a liberatory vision of love.
In retrospect it is evident that by not creating a positive feminist
discourse on love, especially in relation to heterosexuality, we al-
lowed patriarchal mass media to represent the entire movement as a
politic grounded in hatred rather than love. Many females who
wanted to bond with men felt that they could not nurture these ties
and be committed to feminist movement. In actuality, we should
have been spreading the word that feminism would make it possible
for women and men to know love. We know that now.
Visionary feminism is a wise and loving politic. The soul of our
politics is the commitment to ending domination. Love can never
take root in a relationship based on domination and coercion. The
radical feminist critique of patriarchal notions of love was not mis-
guided. However, females and males needed more than a critique of
where we had gone wrong on our journeys to love; we needed an al-
ternative feminist vision. While many of us were coming to love in
our private lives, a love rooted in feminist practice, we were not cre-
ating a broad-based feminist dialogue on love, one that would counter
a focus on those factions within feminism that had been anti-love.
The heartbeat of our alternative vision is still a fundamental and
necessary truth: there can be no love when there is domination.
Feminist thinking and practice emphasize the value of mutual
growth and self-actualization in partnerships and in parenting. This
vision of relationships where everyone's needs are respected, where
everyone has rights, where no one need fear subordination or abuse ,
runs counter to everything patriarchy upholds about the structure of
relationships. Most of us have experienced or will experience male

domination in our intimate private lives in relation to male parental
caregivers, fathers, brothers, or, for heterosexual females, in roman-
tic partnership. In actuality, the emotional well-being of women and
men would be enhanced if both parties embrace feminist thinking
and practice. A genuine feminist politics always brings us from
bondage to freedom, from lovelessness to loving. Mutual partner-
ship is the foundation of love. And feminist practice is the only
movement for social justice in our society which creates the condi-
tions where mutuality can be nurtured.
When we accept that true love is rooted in recognition and ac-
ceptance, that love combines acknowledgment, care, responsibility,
commitment, and knowledge, we understand there can be no love
without justice. With that awareness comes the understanding that
love has the power to transform us, giving us the strength to oppose
domination. To choose feminist politics, then, is a choice to love.
18
FEMINIST SPIRITUALITY
Feminism has been and continues to be a resistance movement
which valorizes spiritual practice. Before I had feminist theory and
practice to pull me fully into the awareness of the necessity of
self-love and self-acceptance as necessary for self-actualization I
walked on a spiritual path which affirmed those same messages. De-
spite the sexism of male-dominated religions females have found in
spiritual practice a place of solace and sanctuary. Throughout the
history of the church in Western life women have turned to monas-
tic traditions to find a place for themselves where they can be with
god without the intervention of men, where they can serve the di-
vine without male domination. With keen spiritual insight and di-
vine clarity the mystic Julian of Norwich would write long before the
advent of contemporary feminism: "Our savior is our true Mother
in whom we are endlessly born and out of whom we shall never
come." Daring to counter the notion of our savior as always and
only male Julian of Norwich was charting the journey back to the sa-
cred feminine, helping to free women from the bondage of patriar-
chal religion.
Early on feminist movement launched a critique of patriarchal
religion that has had a profound impact, changing the nature of reli-
gious worship throughout our nation. Exposing the way Western
105

metaphysical dualism (the assumption that the world can always be
understood by binary categories, that there is an inferior and a supe-
rior, a good and a bad) was the ideological foundation of all forms of
group oppression, sexism, racism, etc., and that such thinking
formed the basis of Judeo-Christian belief systems. To change how
we worship then it was necessary to re-envision spirituality. Femi-
nist critiques of patriarchal religion coincided with an overall cul-
tural shift towards new age spirituality. Within new age spiritual
circles practitioners were turning away from the fundamentalist
Christian thought that had for centuries dominated Western psy-
ches and looking towards the East for answers, for different spiri-
tual traditions. Creation spirituality replaced a patriarchal spirituality
rooted in notions of fall and redemption. In Hinduism, Buddhism,
V oudoun, and diverse spiritual traditions women found images of
female deities that allowed for a return to a vision of a goddess-
centered spirituality.
Early on in feminist movement conflicts arose in response to
those individual activists who felt the movement should stick to pol-
itics and take no stand on religion. A large number of the women
who had come to radical feminism from traditional socialist politics
were atheist. They saw efforts to return to a vision of sacred femi-
ninity as apolitical and sentimental. This divide within the move-
ment did not last long as more women began to see the link between
challenging patriarchal religion and liberatory spirituality. A huge
majority of citizens in the United States identify themselves as Chris-
tian. More than other religious faith Christian doctrine which con-
dones sexism and male domination informs all the ways we learn
about gender roles in this society. Truly, there can be no feminist trans-
formation of our culture without a transformation in our religious beliefs.
Creation-centered Christian spiritual awakening linked itself
with feminist movement. In Original Blessing Matthew Fox explains:
FEMINIST SPIRITUALITY
107
"Patriarchal religions and patriarchal paradigms for religions have
ruled the world's civilizations for at least 3,500 years. The cre-
ation-centered tradition is feminist. Wisdom and Eros counter more
than knowledge or control in such spirituality." Speaking to the is-
sue of tensions between feminists who are concerned with na-
ture/ ecology and those concerned with working for civil rights,
shows that this is an unnecessary dualism:
Political movements for justice are part of the fuller development
of the cosmos, and nature is the matrix in which humans come to
their self-awareness and their awareness of their power to trans-
form. Liberation movements are a fuller development of the cos-
mos's sense of harmony, balance, justice, and celebration. This is
why true spiritual liberation demands rituals of cosmic celebrat-
ing and healing, which will in turn culminate in personal transfor-
mation and liberation.
Liberation theologies see the liberation of exploited and oppressed
groups as essential acts of faith reflecting devotion to divine will.
Struggles to end patriarchy are divinely ordained.
Fundamentalist patriarchal religion has been and remains a bar-
rier preventing the spread of feminist thought and practice. Indeed,
no group has demonized feminists more than right-wing religious
fundamentalists who have called for and condoned the murder of
feminist thinkers, especially those who support women having re-
productive rights. Initially, feminist critiques of Christianity sepa-
rated masses of women from the movement. When feminist
Christians began to offer new and creation-centered critiques and
interpretations of the Bible, of Christian beliefs, however, women
were able to reconcile their feminist politics and sustained commit-
ment to Christian practice. However these activists have yet to fully
organize a movement that addresses masses of Christian believers,
converting them to an understanding that no conflict need exist be-

tween feminism and Christian spirituality. The same is true for those
feminists who are Jewish, Buddhist, Muslim, etc. Until that happens
organized patriarchal religion will always undermine feminist gains.
Initially contemporary feminism placed emphasis on civil
rights and material gains without giving enough attention to spiritu-
alism. Mainstream mass media called attention to feminist critiques
of religion but showed no interest in highlighting the spiritual awak-
ening that occurred among diverse groups of feminist women.
Masses of people still think that feminism is anti-religion. In actual-
ity feminism has helped transform patriarchal religious thought so
that more women can find a connection to the sacred and commit to
spiritual life.
Often feminist spiritual practice found acknowledgment and
acceptance in therapeutic settings where women were seeking to
heal from wounds inflicted by patriarchal assaults, many of which
took place within the family of origin or in relationships. And it was
in the context of feminist therapy that many women received affir-
mation for their spiritual quest. The private nature of this soul
searching often means that the public is not informed about the de-
gree to which feminist activists now acknowledge fully the necessity
of attending to needs of the spirit - of spiritual life. In future femi-
nist movement we will need better strategies for sharing informa-
tion about feminist spirituality.
Choosing alternative spiritual paths has helped many women
sustain commitment to spiritual life even as they continue to chal-
lenge and interrogate patriarchal religion. The institutionalized patri-
archal church or temple has been changed by feminist interventions.
But in more recent years the church has begun to abandon strides
made in the direction of gender equity. The rise in religious funda-
mentalism threatens progressive spirituality. Fundamentalism not
only encourages folks to believe that inequality is "natural," it per-
FEMINIST SPIRITUALITY
109
petuates the notion that control of the female body is necessary.
Hence its assault on reproductive rights. Concurrently religious fun-
damentalism imposes on females and males repressive notions of
sexuality which validate sexual coercion in many different forms.
Clearly, there is still a need for feminist activists to highlight orga-
nized religion, to engage in ongoing critique and resistance.
While a world of wonderful, feminist-affirming spiritual tradi-
tions abound now, masses of people have no access to knowledge
about these practices. They often feel that patriarchal religion is the
only place where anyone cares about their spiritual well-being. Patri-
archal religion has successfully used mass media, particularly televi-
sion, to spread its message. Alternative spiritual paths must do
likewise if we are to counter the notion that patriarchal religion is the
only path. Feminist spirituality created a space foreveryone to inter-
rogate outmoded belief systems and created new paths. Repre-
senting god in diverse ways, restoring our respect for the sacred
feminine, it has helped us find ways to affirm and/ or re-affirm the
importance of spiritual life. Identifying liberation from any form of
domination and oppression as essentially a spiritual quest returns us
to a spirituality which unites spiritual practice with our struggles for
justice and liberation. A feminist vision of spiritual fulfillment is nat-
urally the foundation of authentic spiritual life.
19
VISIONARY FEMINISM
To be truly visionary we have to root our imagination in our con-
crete reality while simultaneously imagining possibilities beyond that
reality. A primary strength of contemporary feminism has been the
way it has changed shape and direction. Movements for social jus-
tice that hold on to outmoded ways of thinking and acting tend to
fail. The roots of visionary feminism extend back to the early '60s.
At the very start of the women's liberation movement visionary
thinkers were present dreaming about a radical! revolutionary politi-
cal movement that would in its reformist stage grant women civil
rights within the existing white supremacist capitalist patriarchal sys-
tem while simultaneously working to undermine and overthrow that
system. The dream was of replacing that culture of domination with
a world of participatory economics grounded in communalism and
social democracy, a world without discrimination based on race or
gender, a world where recognition of mutuality and interdepen-
dency would be the dominant ethos, a global ecological vision of
how the planet can survive and how everyone on it can have access
to peace and well-being.
Radical! revolutionary feminist visions became clearer and
more complex as the movement progressed. However they were of-
ten obscured by the absolutism of reformist feminists who really felt
110
VISIONARY FEMINISM
III
safer working for change solely within the existing social order.
While some reformist feminist activists were really eager to change
economic discrimination based on gender so that they could have
equality with men of privileged classes, others just believed the
movement would create more concrete relevant change in women's
lives if energy was focused in the direction of reform. However ulti-
mately forsaking the radical heartbeat of feminist struggle simply
made the movement more vulnerable to cooptation by mainstream
capitalist patriarchy.
Seduced by class power and/ or greater class mobility once they
made strides in the existing social order fewer women were inter-
ested in working to dismande that system. On one hand while we are
told again and again by individual feminist thinkers like Carol
Gilligan and others that women are more caring, more ethical, the
facts of how women conduct themselves in relation to less powerful
women suggest otherwise. The ethics of care women show in the
ethnic or racial groups with which they identify do not extend to
those with whom they do not feel empathy, identification, or soli-
darity. Women of privilege (most of whom are white but not all)
have rapidly invested in the sustained subordination of working-class
and poor women.
A fundamental goal of visionary feminism was to create strate-
gies to change the lot of all women and enhance their personal
power. To do that, though, the movement needed to move way be-
yond equal rights agendas and start with basic issues like literacy
campaigns that would embrace all women, but especially women of
poorer groups. There is no feminist school, no feminist college. And
there has been no sustained effort to create these institutions.
Educated white women as the central beneficiaries of job and career-
based affirmative action programs reaped benefits in the existing
structures and were often not motivated to do the work of creating

institutions based on feminist principles. These institutions could
never pay high salaries. But even independently wealthy feminist ac-
tivists have not used their money to fund educational programs that
begin to work with women and girls who are disadvantaged when it
comes to basic skills.
While visionary feminist thinkers have understood our need for
a broad-based feminist movement, one that addresses the needs of
girls and boys, women and men, across class, we have not produced
a body of visionary feminist theory written in an accessible language
or shared through oral communication. Today in academic circles
much of the most celebrated feminist theory is written in a sophisti-
cated jargon that only the well-educated can read. Most people in
our society do not have a basic understanding of feminism; they can-
not acquire that understanding from a wealth of diverse material,
grade school-level primers, and so on, because this material does
not exist. We must create it if we are to rebuild feminist movement
that is truly for everyone.
Feminist advocates have not organized resources to ensure that
we have television stations or consistent spots on any existing sta-
tions. There is no feminist news hour on any television or radio
show. One of the difficulties we faced spreading the word about
feminism is that anything having to do with the female gender is
seen as covering feminist ground even if it does not contain a femi-
nist perspective. We do have radio shows and a few television shows
that highlight gender issues, but that it is not the same as highlight-
ing feminism. Ironically one of the achievements of contemporary
feminism is that everyone is more open to discussing gender and the
concerns of women, but again, not necessarily from a feminist per-
spective. For example, feminist movement created the cultural revo-
lution that made it possible for our society to face the problem of
male violence against women and children.
VISIONARY FEMINISM
113
Even though representations of domestic violence abound in
mass media and discussions take place on every front, rarely does
the public link ending male violence to ending male domination, to
eradicating patriarchy. Most citizens of this nation still do not under-
stand the link between male domination and male violence in the
home. And that failure to understand is underscored as our nation is
called upon to respond to violent murders of family members,
friends, and schoolmates by young males of all classes. In mass me-
dia everyone raises the question of why this violence is taking place
without linking it to patriarchal thinking.
Mass-based feminist education for critical consciousness is
needed. Unfortunately class elitism has shaped the direction of fem-
inist thought. Most feminist thinkers/theorists do their work in the
elite setting of the university. For the most part we do not write chil-
dren's books, teach in grade schools, or sustain a powerful lobby
which has a constructive impact on what is taught in the public
school. I began to write books for
wanted to be a part of a feminist
thought available to everyone. Books
sage to individuals of all ages who do
children precisely because I
movement making feminist
on tape help extend the mes-
not read or write.
A collective door-to-door effort to spread the message of femi-
nism is needed for the movement to begin anew, to start again with
the basic premise that feminist politics is necessarily radical. And
since that which is radical is often pushed underground in our set-
ting then we must do everything we can to bring feminism above
ground to spread the word. Because feminism is a movement to end
sexism and sexist domination and oppression, a struggle that in-
cludes efforts to end gender discrimination and create equality, it is
fundamentally a radical movement.
Confusion about this inherent radicalism emerged as feminist
activists moved away from challenging sexism in all its manifesta-

tions and focused solely on reforms. Advancing the notion that
there can be many "feminisms" has served the conservative and lib-
eral political interests of women seeking status and privileged class
power who were among the first group to use the term "power femi-
nists." They also were the group that began to suggest that one
could be feminist and be anti-abortion. This is another misguided
notion. Granting women the civil right to have control over our
bodies is a basic feminist principle. Whether an individual female
should have an abortion is purely a matter of choice. It is not
anti-feminist for us to choose not to have abortions. But it is a femi-
nist principle that women should have the right to choose.
Parasitic class relations and the greed for wealth and power have
led women to betray the interests of poor and working-class
women. Women who once espoused feminist thinking now support
public policies that are anti-welfare. They see no contradiction in
this stance. They simply give their "brand" of feminism its own
name. The representation of feminism as a lifestyle or a commodity
automatically obscures the importance of feminist politics. Today
many women want civil rights without feminism. They want the sys-
tem of patriarchy to remain intact in the private sphere even as they
desire equality in the public sphere. But visionary feminist thinkers
have understood from the movement's inception that collusion
with patriarchy, even patriarchal support of some aspects of femi-
nist movement (i.e. the demand for women to work), will leave fe-
males vulnerable. We saw that rights gained without fundamental
change in the systems that govern our lives could be easily taken
away. And we are already seeing that happen in the arena of repro-
ductive rights, particularly abortion. Giving civil rights within patri-
archy has proved dangerous because it has led women to think that
we are better off than we are, that the structures of domination are
changing. In actuality those structures are re-entrenched as many women
VISIONARY FEMINISM
115
move away from feminism.
Extreme anti-feminist backlash has also undermined feminist
movement. A significant part of the backlash is the bashing and
trashing of feminism done by opportunistic, conservative women.
For example: a recent book, What Our Mothers Did Not Tell Us: Wry
Happiness Eludes the Modern Woman by Danielle Crittendon, tells
women that we should all stay home and mother to produce healthy
children, that we should acknowledge basic differences in male and
female psyches and that above all it is feminism that is at fault.
Critics of feminism blame the movement for all the dissatisfaction
modern women face. They never talk about patriarchy, male domi-
nation, racism, or class exploitation. While the anti-feminist books
tend to be written in an accessible language that appeals to a broad
readership, there is no body of popular feminist theory that serves as
a counter to their message.
When I talk with radical feminists, especially those of us who
are now in mid-life, between the ages of 35 and 65, I hear wonderful
testimony about the constructive impact of feminism. It is essential
that we document this work so that it stands as testimony counter-
ing the popular assumption that all feminism did was make the lives
of women harder. Indeed it has made life far more complicated for
women to have feminist thought and practice yet still remain within a
patriarchal system of thought and action that is basically unchanged.
Visionary feminists have always understood the necessity of
converting m\n. We know all the women in the world could become
feminists but if men remain sexist our lives would still be dimin-
ished. Gender warfare would still be a norm. Those feminist activ-
ists who refuse to accept men as comrades in struggle - who
harbor irrational fears that if men benefit in any way from feminist
politics women lose - have misguidedly helped the public view
feminism with suspicion and disdain. And at times man-hating fe-

males would rather see feminism not progress than confront the is-
sues they have with men. It is urgent that men take up the banner of
feminism and challenge patriarchy. The safety and continuation of
life on the planet requires feminist conversion of men.
Feminist movement is advanced whenever any male or female
of any age works on behalf of ending sexism. That work does not
necessarily require us to join organizations; we can work on behalf
of feminism right where we are. We can begin to do the work on
feminism at home, right where we live, educating ourselves and our
loved ones. In the past feminist movement has not provided indi-
vidual females and male enough blueprints for change. While femi-
nist politics are grounded in a firm set of beliefs about our p~rpose
and direction, our strategies for feminist change must be vaned.
There is no one path to feminism. Individuals from diverse
backgrounds need feminist theory that speaks direcdy to their lives.
As a black woman feminist thinker I find it essential to critically ex-
amine gender roles in black life to discover the specific concerns and
strategies that must be addressed so that all black people can under-
stand the relevance of feminist struggle in our lives.
Radical visionary feminism encourages all of us to courageously
examine our lives from the standpoint of gender, race, and class so
that we can accurately understand our position within the imperialist
white supremacist capitalist patriarchy. For years many feminist
women held to the misguided assumption that gender was the sole
factor determining their status. Breaking through this denial was a
crucial turning point for feminist politics. It enabled women to face
the way biases of race and class had led to the formation of a
women's movement that was not mass-based.
We are now ready to renew feminist struggle. Anti-feminist
backlash exists because the movement was successful at showing
everyone the threat patriarchy poses to the well-being of females
VISIONARY FEMINISM
117
and males. If feminist movement had not offered a true accounting of
the dangers of perpetuating sexism and male domination, it would have
failed. There would have been no need to mount an anti-feminist
campaign. While patriarchal mass media continues to spread the lie
that males are not welcome in the feminist classroom, truthfully
more males are studying feminist thought and converting to femi-
nist thinking. It is this significant change in feminist movement that
makes it more of a threat to patriarchy. As has been stated, had the
movement only focused on women, the patriarchal status quo would
be intact and there would be no need to severely bash feminism.
We are told again and again by patriarchal mass media, by sexist
leaders, that feminism is dead, that it no longer has meaning. In actu-
ality, females and males of all ages, everywhere, continue to grapple
with the issue of gender equality, continue to seek roles for them-
selves that will liberate rather than restrict and confine; and they
continue to turn towards feminism for answers. Visionary feminism
offers us hope for the future. By emphasizing an ethics of mutuality
and interdependency feminist thinking offers us a way to end domi-
nation while simultaneously changing the impact of inequality. In a
universe where mutuality is the norm, there may be times when all is
not equal, but the consequence of that inequality will not be subor-
dination, colonization, and dehumanization.
Feminism as a movement to end sexism, sexist exploitation, and
oppression is alive and well. While we do not have a mass-based
movement, the renewal of such a movement is our primary goal. To
ensure the continued relevance of feminist movement in our lives
visionary feminist theory must be constandy made and re-made so
that it addresses us where we live, in our present. Women and men
have made great strides in the direction of gender equality. And
those strides towards freedom must give us strength to go further.
We must courageously learn from the past and work for a future

where feminist principles will undergird every aspect of our public
and private lives. Feminist politics aims to end domination to free us
to be who we are - to live lives where we love justice, where we can
live in peace. Feminism is for everybody.
